NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Office of Inspector General
Office of Audits
NASA’S MANAGEMENT OF
THE ARTEMIS MISSIONS
November 15, 2021
Report No. IG-22-003
Office of Inspector General
To report, fraud, waste, abuse, or mismanagement, contact the NASA OIG Hotline at 800-424-9183 or 800-535-8134 (TDD) or
visit https://oig.nasa.gov/hotline.html. You can also write to NASA Inspector General, P.O. Box 23089, L’Enfant Plaza Station,
Washington, D.C. 20026. The identity of each writer and caller can be kept confidential, upon request, to the extent permitted
by law.
To suggest ideas or request future audits, contact the Assistant Inspector General for Audits at https://oig.nasa.gov/aboutAll.html.
- - - - -
RESULTS IN BRIEF
NASA’s Management of the Artemis Missions
November 15, 2021 IG 22 003 (A 20 008 01)
NASA Office of Inspector General
Office of Audits
WHY WE PERFORMED THIS AUDIT
The Artemis program seeks to return humans to the Moon by late 2024 rather than 2028 as initially planned. Faced with
a shortened timeframe, an uncertain budget, and the nascency of the required development work, NASA implemented
modifications to its routine procurement and program management practices in an attempt to accelerate the mission
schedule and reduce costs. The Agency’s lunar strategy includes development of the Space Launch System (SLS) heavy-
lift rocket, the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle (Orion) capsule, a Human Landing System (HLS) to transport astronauts
from lunar orbit to the Moon’s surface, the Gateway outpost orbiting the Moon, next-generation spacesuits, and
delivery of science investigations and technology demonstrations to the lunar surface by commercial landers.
Currently NASA’s most ambitious and costly activity, the Artemis program faces schedule, procurement, technical, and
funding risks. This includes procurement of Artemis-related technologies and space flight hardware using research and
development contracts that leverage commercial capabilities but require a Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR)
deviation for acquiring services and hardware. SLS and Orion have also experienced technical challenges in later
development phases as well as the effects of COVID-19 restrictions and severe weather events. Additionally,
the Gateway and HLS Programs received significantly less funding in fiscal year (FY) 2021 than required to meet NASA’s
initial acquisition strategy.
As the second in a series of audits examining NASA’s Artemis plans, this report assessed the Artemis program’s schedule
and projected costs as well as how the Agency’s acquisition and programmatic approaches facilitate landing astronauts
on the Moon. To complete this work, we reviewed documents, systems, policies, and procedures pertaining to
schedule, cost, budget, operations, acquisition strategy, and program/project management requirements related to
Artemis, its programs, and contactors. We also reviewed contracts, interviewed NASA and contractor officials, and
conducted site visits at SpaceX headquarters in California and its Starbase facility in Texas.
WHAT WE FOUND
NASA’s three initial Artemis missions, designed to culminate in a crewed lunar landing, face varying degrees of technical
difficulties and delays heightened by the COVID-19 pandemic and weather events that will push launch schedules from
months to years past the Agency’s current goals. With Artemis I mission elements now being integrated and tested at
Kennedy Space Center, we estimate NASA will be ready to launch by summer 2022 rather than November 2021 as
planned. Although Artemis II is scheduled to launch in late 2023, we project that it will be delayed until at least
mid-2024 due to the mission’s reuse of Orion components from Artemis I. While the Advanced Exploration Systems
(AES) Division—which includes HLS, Gateway, and next-generation spacesuits—is working on an integrated master
schedule (IMS) for Artemis III that incorporates Exploration Systems Development (ESD) Division programs—SLS, Orion,
and Exploration Ground Systems—the draft version does not include information on programs critical to Artemis that
are outside of AES and ESD. Given the time needed to develop and fully test the HLS and new spacesuits, we project
NASA will exceed its current timetable for landing humans on the Moon in late 2024 by several years.
In addition, NASA lacks a comprehensive and accurate cost estimate that accounts for all Artemis program costs. For
FYs 2021 through 2025, the Agency uses a rough estimate for the first three missions that excludes $25 billion for key
activities related to planned missions beyond Artemis III. When aggregating all relevant costs across mission directorates,
NASA is projected to spend $93 billion on the Artemis effort up to FY 2025. We also project the current production and
operations cost of a single SLS/Orion system at $4.1 billion per launch for Artemis I through IV, although the Agency’s
ongoing initiatives aimed at increasing affordability seek to reduce that cost. Multiple factors contribute to the high cost
of ESD programs, including the use of sole-source, cost-plus contracts; the inability to definitize key contract terms in a
timely manner; and the fact that except for the Orion capsule, its subsystems, and the supporting launch facilities, all
components are expendable and “single use” unlike emerging commercial space flight systems. Without capturing,
accurately reporting, and reducing the cost of future SLS/Orion missions, the Agency will face significant challenges to
sustaining its Artemis program in its current configuration.
Further, for HLS, NASA has modified its traditional acquisition approach for large space flight programs to reduce costs,
encourage innovation, and meet an aggressive schedule for its Artemis lunar landings. While its acquisition approach
relies on competition to drive down costs and ensure redundancy, the Agency selected a single provider—SpaceX—
after receiving $2.5 billion less than requested for HLS development in FY 2021. To help compensate, the Agency is
accelerating its Lunar Exploration Transportation Services procurement for sustainable, regularly-recurring crewed
lunar transportation services, and in September 2021 awarded five HLS contracts for the continued development of
sustainable HLS capabilities as a prelude to the competitive services procurement. Over the past year, NASA has
worked to solidify its HLS requirements and standards, established insight and collaboration teams, and plans to
establish resident offices at SpaceX. However, under NASA’s tailored project management approach, HLS will use less
standardized milestone reviews and instead utilize other techniques such as annual synchronization reviews throughout
development and testing, but this approach runs the risk of technical changes later in development. Finally, instead of
using a systems integrator or Artemis program manager, NASA is establishing various collaborative processes including
new boards and a multi-directorate council to facilitate the communication and approval process. The effectiveness of
this approach remains to be seen. While these modified approaches have the potential benefit of decreasing costs and
encouraging innovation, they also raise the possibility of schedule and performance risks on NASA’s human-rated systems.
WHAT WE RECOMMENDED
To increase accuracy, transparency, and safety of human space flight, we recommended NASA’s Associate Administrator
for Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate: (1) develop a realistic, risk-informed schedule that includes
sufficient margin to better align Agency expectations with the development schedule; (2) expand upon the existing draft
Artemis IMS to include Artemis programs outside AES and ESD to properly align dependencies across directorates;
(3) develop an Artemis-wide cost estimate and update it on an annual basis; (4) maintain an accounting of per-mission
costs and establish a benchmark against which NASA can assess the outcome of initiatives to increase the affordability of
ESD systems; (5) definitize outstanding Artemis-related contracts within 180 days in accordance with NASA FAR
Supplement 1843.7005(a); (6) develop a realistic funding profile and schedule given the underfunding of HLS in FY 2021,
selection of one HLS award, and desire to compete a sustainability contract for future lunar missions; and (7) identify
measurable cost reduction targets for its ESD contractors. We also recommended NASA’s Chief Engineer in coordination
with the HLS Program Manager: (8) validate annual synchronization reviews meet the intent and expectations of the
milestone reviews replaced by the tailored acquisition approach, and the NASA Deputy Administrator in coordination
with Mission Directorate Associate Administrators: (9) codify the remaining governance structure such as the Federated
Boards and Joint Directorate Program Management Council.
We provided a draft of this report to NASA management who concurred with
Recommendations 1, 5, 6, 7, and 8, and described planned actions to address
them. We consider the proposed actions responsive for these
recommendations and will close them upon completion and verification. In
addition, the Agency partially concurred with Recommendations 2 and 9 and
non-concurred with Recommendations 3 and 4. These four recommendations
For more information on the NASA
Office of Inspector General and to
view this and other reports visit
https://oig.nasa.gov/.
will remain unresolved pending further discussions with NASA.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction.................................................................................................................................................. 1
Background ............................................................................................................................................... 2
Artemis Program Making Progress But Timetable Slipping By Months for Test Flights and Years
for Lunar Landing........................................................................................................................................12
Artemis II Delayed Until at Least Mid-2024 Due to Artemis I Dependencies and Reuse of
Time Needed for Development, Testing, and Certification of the HLS and Spacesuits Will Delay
Artemis I Progressing Toward Launch by Summer 2022 ........................................................................12
Orion Avionics .........................................................................................................................................13
Planned Lunar Landing Schedule by Several Years .................................................................................14
NASA’s Estimates Significantly Understate Costs of Artemis Program....................................................19
NASA Lacks a Credible Cost Estimate for the Artemis Missions .............................................................19
Total Artemis Costs Expected to Reach $93 Billion by 2025...................................................................21
SLS/Orion Production and Operating Costs Will Average Over $4 Billion Per Launch ...........................23
Ongoing Affordability Initiatives and Commercial Alternatives .............................................................25
NASA’s Modified Acquisition and Management Approaches for HLS Will Reduce Costs and
Encourage Innovation But Also Increase Risk ...........................................................................................28
Modified Fixed-Price Contract Will Reduce Cost Growth and NASA’s Process to Mitigate
Project Management Approach for the Human Landing System Modeled After Commercial
NASA Managing Artemis Activities Using Newly Established Processes Rather Than a Systems
Only One Company Selected for HLS Demonstration Mission Due to Reduced Funding ......................28
Technical and Safety Risks Is Being Implemented ..................................................................................30
Crew Program .........................................................................................................................................32
Integrator or Program Manager .............................................................................................................33
Conclusion ..................................................................................................................................................36
Recommendations, Management’s Response, and Our Evaluation ........................................................37
Appendix A: Scope and Methodology ......................................................................................................39
Appendix B: HLS Program’s Tailored Project Management Approach....................................................42
Appendix C: Artemis System Descriptions ...............................................................................................44
Appendix D: Artemis Contracts.................................................................................................................57
Appendix E: Management’s Comments ...................................................................................................61
Appendix F: Report Distribution ...............................................................................................................67
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 i
Acronyms
ABC Agency Baseline Commitment
AES Advanced Exploration Systems
CLPS Commercial Lunar Payload Services
COVID-19 Coronavirus Disease 2019
EGS Exploration Ground Systems
ESA European Space Agency
ESD Exploration Systems Development
EVA Extravehicular Activity
FAR Federal Acquisition Regulation
FY fiscal year
GAO Government Accountability Office
HALO Habitation and Logistics Outpost
HEOMD Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate
HLS Human Landing System
IMS integrated master schedule
ISS International Space Station
JCL Joint Cost and Schedule Confidence Level
KDP Key Decision Point
LETS Lunar Exploration Transportation Services
NextSTEP Next Space Technologies for Exploration Partnerships
NFS NASA FAR Supplement
OIG Office of Inspector General
PPE Power and Propulsion Element
SE&I Systems Engineering and Integration
SRA Schedule Risk Analysis
SLS Space Launch System
TRL Technology Readiness Level
VIPER Volatiles Investigating Polar Exploration Rover
xEMU Exploration Extravehicular Mobility Unit
xEVA Exploration Extravehicular Activity
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 ii
INTRODUCTION
In March 2019, NASA committed to landing humans on the Moon’s South Pole by 2024 instead of 2028
as initially planned.1 Faced with a shortened timeframe, an uncertain budget, and the nascency of the
required development work, NASA implemented modifications to its routine procurement and program
management practices in an effort to reduce costs and accelerate the mission schedule. In addition to
the Space Launch System (SLS) heavy-lift rocket, the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle (Orion) capsule,
and a Human Landing System (HLS), the Agency’s lunar strategy includes development of both the
Gateway outpost orbiting the Moon and next-generation spacesuits capable of sustaining astronauts on
the lunar surface, as well as multiple deliveries of science investigations and technology demonstrations
to the Moon by commercial landers.
This ambitious schedule is not without risk. NASA is procuring Artemis-related technologies and space
flight hardware using a variety of methods, including research and development contracts that leverage
commercial capabilities and state-of-the-art innovation, but require a Federal Acquisition Regulation
(FAR) deviation. Additionally, and not unexpectedly, Orion and SLS have experienced technical
challenges in later development phases, along with enduring the effects of Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) restrictions for over 18 months and numerous severe weather events. For example, during
testing, Orion had an internal power and data unit that lost redundancy in November 2020, and the SLS
required a second hot fire test of its Core Stage in March 2021 adding months to an already delayed
schedule, making the planned November 2021 Artemis I launch date not feasible.
2
In addition to the procurement and technical risks, both the Gateway and HLS Programs received
significantly less funding for fiscal year (FY) 2021 than initially required. Costs for the Artemis mission,
spread among various NASA directorates and divisions, are expected to reach $93 billion by FY 2025.3
Although the Biden Administration has indicated it will continue the Artemis program, the funding level
is still being determined and the Administration’s commitment to the current goal of landing astronauts
on the Moon in 2024 is in flux with a revised timetable expected in late 2021.
This report is the second in a series of audits examining NASA’s Artemis plans. In this review, we
assessed the Artemis program’s schedule and projected costs, as well as how the Agency’s acquisition
and programmatic approaches seek to facilitate landing astronauts on the Moon. See Appendix A for
details on the audit’s scope and methodology.
1 In a recent report on NASA’s development of next-generation spacesuits, we concluded that delays in the Agency’s efforts
will preclude a lunar landing in late 2024. NASA Office of Inspector General (OIG), NASA's Development of Next-Generation
Spacesuits (IG-21-025, August 10, 2021).
2 In October 2021, the Agency announced that the Artemis I launch would be delayed until February 2022 at the earliest.
NASA officials said they plan to announce an official target launch date after several key tests are completed in the coming
months. In November 2021, the NASA Administrator announced additional delays with Artemis II launching no later than
May 2024 and Artemis III launching no earlier than 2025.
3 The $93 billion figure was derived from examining NASA’s obligations, FY 2021 Budget Operating Plan, and budget
projections for programs and projects involved in the Artemis program between FY 2012 and FY 2025.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 1
Background
Scheduled to launch in late 2021, Artemis I is planned as the first uncrewed flight of the integrated
SLS/Orion system on a trajectory that will include a series of orbits around the Moon. The second
mission and first crewed flight—Artemis II—will also orbit the Moon and prepare the way for Artemis III
in late 2024. In this third mission, the Orion capsule will dock in lunar orbit directly to the HLS to
transport astronauts to and from the lunar surface.4 Prior to the astronauts’ arrival, NASA intends to
explore the lunar landing area with robotic systems as part of its Commercial Lunar Payload Services
(CLPS) initiative.
5 Subsequent Artemis missions will include a longer-term presence on the Moon that
incorporates use of the Gateway in lunar orbit, ground infrastructure on the lunar surface such as a
habitat, and surface transportation like a lunar rover. NASA’s plan to land astronauts on the Moon relies
heavily on the maturity of a number of key systems, including the SLS/Orion and next-generation
spacesuits. In addition, NASA will rely on the commercial sector to launch both the Gateway and HLS
into Near Rectilinear Halo Orbit.6 Figure 1 shows the current schedule for the Artemis exploration
missions and commercial launches in support of a lunar landing.
4 NASA’s goal is to have the Gateway in an orbit around the Moon to support Artemis IV. The initial elements of the orbiting
lunar platform will consist of the Power and Propulsion Element, which provides electrical power and propulsion to the
Gateway, and the Habitation and Logistics Outpost, which provides working and living space for the astronauts while the
Orion is docked to it.
5 Initiated in 2018, NASA’s CLPS initiative is intended to allow rapid acquisition of lunar delivery services from American
companies for payloads that advance science, exploration, and commercial development of the Moon.
6 Near Rectilinear Halo Orbit is an orbit around the Moon with a 7-day cycle, which will take the Gateway, Orion, and HLS as
close to the lunar surface as 1,600 kilometers (1,000 miles) and as far away as 68,260 kilometers (42,415 miles). Consequently,
the lunar lander can efficiently depart the Gateway to travel to the lunar surface approximately every 7 days.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 2
Figure 1: Calendar Year Timeline of NASA Artemis and Related Commercial Launches (as of September 2021)
Source: NASA Office of Inspector General (OIG) depiction of Agency program information.
Artemis Concept for Returning Astronauts to the Moon
By the time Artemis III launches, NASA expects to have flown the SLS/Orion system twice with one
uncrewed mission (Artemis I) and a second crewed mission (Artemis II) around the Moon with a
functioning Environmental Control and Life Support System. During the Artemis II mission, Orion will
remain in Earth’s orbit for several days to ensure the life support system is fully operational before
proceeding to the orbit around the Moon. All three missions will send the spacecraft into a trans-lunar
injection that places the Orion capsule and its service module in a trajectory toward the Moon.7 On
Artemis III, the Orion spacecraft will then use the propulsion produced by its service module to travel
to Near Rectilinear Halo Orbit around the Moon. NASA also plans to position the Gateway in this orbit
to act as an outpost for staging Moon landings and future deep space or Mars departures.
NASA considers Artemis III a demonstration mission that will illustrate the capability to land a crewed
spacecraft on the Moon. NASA has contracted with Space Exploration Technologies Corp. (SpaceX) to
develop an HLS vehicle to transport two astronauts to the Moon’s South Pole on this mission.
Compared to the first two missions, the Artemis III mission profile is much more complicated in that it
7 A trans-lunar injection is a propulsive maneuver used to set a spacecraft on a trajectory that will cause it to arrive at
the Moon.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 3
will require a number of launches of Tanker Starships and a fuel depot to provide propellent for the HLS
and will also involve flying the SLS/Orion separately to link up the astronauts with the HLS in lunar orbit.
Figure 2 presents a graphical summary of the Artemis III mission.
Figure 2: Planned Artemis III Mission Profile (as of October 2021)
Source: NASA OIG presentation of Agency data.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 4
SpaceX will use a Super Heavy rocket booster
currently in development to launch the HLS Starship
from Kennedy Space Center (Kennedy) and SpaceX’s
launch facility in Boca Chica, Texas, into the Earth’s
orbit where it will dock with SpaceX’s depot
spacecraft for refueling.8 From there, the Starship
will use its internal propulsion to travel to Near
Rectilinear Halo Orbit where it will position in lunar
orbit to dock directly with the Orion capsule. NASA
plans to separately launch and fly four astronauts in
the Orion to dock directly with the pre-positioned
HLS Starship. Two astronauts will board the HLS and
descend to the Moon’s surface while the other
astronauts remain on the Orion to provide support and communication for the landing team. While on
the surface for up to a week, the astronauts will leave the spacecraft and conduct one or more lunar
excursions. Upon completion, the HLS will launch from the Moon and return to the Orion in lunar orbit
before Orion heads back to Earth with the four astronauts for a landing in the Pacific Ocean. Following
this demonstration of the HLS, NASA intends to return crew to the lunar surface by using a FAR-based
contract, Lunar Exploration Transportation Services (LETS), in which commercial companies will develop
sustainable human landing systems and provide recurring crewed lunar landing services. Follow on
missions will use additional capabilities including the Gateway and lunar rovers, with longer duration
stays on the lunar surface. See Appendix B for information on HLS’s programmatic approach.
NASA’s Organizational and Programmatic Structure for
Integrating Space Flight Elements
Artemis is not a formal program under NASA management standards despite spanning multiple mission
directorates, divisions, and programs.9 Unlike the Apollo or Shuttle Programs that consolidated all
efforts under a single programmatic organization, NASA decided to establish a more distributed method
for integrating Artemis elements and capabilities. As part of this process, the Agency first designated
lead directorates or divisions to integrate the missions. Overall, the Human Exploration and Operations
Mission Directorate (HEOMD) is responsible for integrating the Artemis missions.10 For Artemis I and II,
NASA’s Exploration Systems Development (ESD) Division, which includes the SLS, Orion, and Exploration
8 Although not fully planned yet for Artemis flights, future missions are expected to launch from a floating launch pad in the
Gulf of Mexico, which could add additional launch facilities and potentially ease safety and regulatory concerns with
launching a massive rocket near populated areas.
9 NASA Procedural Requirements 7120.5E, NASA Space Flight Program and Project Management Requirements (Updated
w/Change 18) (August 14, 2012). A program is defined as a strategic investment by a Mission Directorate or Mission Support
Office that has a defined architecture and/or technical approach, requirements, funding level, and management structure
that initiates and directs one or more projects. A program implements a strategic direction that NASA has identified as
needed to accomplish Agency goals and objectives.
10 On September 21, 2021, the NASA Administrator announced that the Agency would be splitting HEOMD into two separate
mission directorates. The Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate is responsible for integrating the early
Artemis missions, defining and managing systems development for programs critical to NASA’s Artemis program, and
planning for NASA’s Moon to Mars exploration approach in an integrated manner. The other space flight mission
directorate—Space Operations Mission Directorate—will focus on launch and space operations, including the International
Space Station, commercialization of low Earth orbit, and eventually operations around the Moon. The implementation
process for this organizational change will take several months. For purposes of this report, we refer to the organization
using its pre-transition terminology.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 5
Ground Systems (EGS) Programs, is the lead authority for integration. The Advanced Exploration
Systems (AES) Division is responsible for NASA's return of humans to the Moon; associated lunar
programs such as Gateway, HLS, Lunar Terrain Vehicle, and next-generation spacesuits; and overall
mission integration starting with Artemis III. NASA’s Science and Space Technology Mission Directorates
also contribute vital aspects to the Artemis missions such as technology demonstrations and robotic
explorations of the Moon prior to astronaut landings. See Appendix C for a description of key Artemis
systems such as the SLS and HLS and related science missions.
In order to ensure strategic alignment across the Agency, in October 2019 the NASA Administrator
announced the formation of a Federated Board for Artemis missions led by the deputy associate
administrators of HEOMD and the Science and Space Technology Mission Directorates (see Figure 3).
The Board was charged with cross-directorate coordination and implementation of Agency strategic
guidance; out-year planning integration, including future architecture definition and planning; and
long-term strategic assessments to inform NASA’s strategy. The Board meets weekly and focuses
specifically on technical development and integration of a long-term lunar surface presence as well as
the first human mission to Mars. Additionally, an “expanded” Federated Board was created that
includes other NASA stakeholders, such as the Offices of General Counsel and International and
Interagency Relations, and also meets weekly.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 6
Figure 3: Artemis Program Organizational Structure and Integration (as of August 2021)
Source: NASA OIG presentation of Agency information.
In September 2020, HEOMD was reorganized to include a Systems Engineering and Integration (SE&I)
function at the mission directorate level responsible for ensuring program and project requirements
reflect HEOMD’s overall strategy, leading the formulation of mission plans, and providing technical
direction for HEOMD activities. The SE&I function can also participate in several joint control boards
that bring together HEOMD programs for the purpose of issue resolution. AES has a similar capability
with its SE&I function to integrate all programs and projects operating as part of the lunar landing
missions starting with Artemis III. AES was designated the lead office to oversee different phases of
mission operations—known as “integration spheres”—and has delegated technical work and integration
to designated programs: from launch, to lunar orbit, to the lunar surface, and everything in between.
AES maintains overall accountability and integration responsibility over Artemis missions beginning with
Artemis III and has insight over these processes via joint control boards, integration panels, and working
groups. By also involving ESD, these boards help define requirements and evaluate risks across all major
Artemis programs within HEOMD.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 7
Artemis Acquisition Strategy
For Artemis, NASA is using a variety of acquisition strategies for the design, development, and purchase
of space flight systems or services, with most approaches utilizing FAR-based contracts.
11 However,
the Agency used Space Act Agreements for more recent space flight developments, including cargo
transportation services to the International Space Station (ISS) and the early stages of the Commercial
Crew Program.
12 Upon completion of these developments, NASA did not own the space flight systems
but rather purchased transportation services under a FAR contract. For the HLS demonstration contract
with SpaceX, NASA is relying on a research and development section of the FAR—FAR Part 35 Broad
Agency Announcements—rather than Space Act Agreements, as the contracting method for
development. For the transportation services phase of HLS, NASA will use a FAR-based approach to
purchase recurring transportation services. While a similar type of FAR Part 35 contracting is being used
for the Gateway, the Agency will take delivery and ownership of the first Gateway elements prior to
their launch on a SpaceX Falcon Heavy rocket.13
The FAR outlines contract vehicles to acquire goods and services, such as cost-reimbursement and
fixed-price contracts. In cost-reimbursement contracts, the Agency agrees to pay all allowable costs
the contractor incurs in delivering the service or product. Such contracts are often used in space flight
development projects when the government does not fully know the requirements of the project,
changes are likely, and estimated costs are difficult to identify. All three ESD Programs—SLS, Orion,
and EGS—have used these types of contracts along with a periodic award fee based upon contractor
performance, and in some cases an incentive fee for cost reductions and meeting milestones on time
or ahead of schedule. For each of these programs, we previously reported on significant cost growth,
schedule slips, and performance issues, and additionally for SLS and Orion the inappropriate use of
award fees during periods of poor contractor performance.14 While NASA owns both the SLS and Orion
space flight systems, having a different contractor other than the one who developed the systems take
over production would have been extremely costly, and as a result both incumbents—The Boeing
Company (Boeing) and Lockheed Martin Corporation (Lockheed Martin)—received follow-on contracts
for production of additional SLS and Orion vehicles, respectively (Appendix D provides a summary of SLS,
Orion, and other ongoing contracts critical to the Artemis mission).
In fixed-price contracts, the contractor agrees to deliver a product or service at an agreed-upon price
with profit built-in to the price. NASA generally uses fixed-price contracts when it can clearly define
costs and risks, like in the later phases of Commercial Crew Transportation Services. For both the HLS
and Gateway’s Power and Propulsion Element (PPE) and Habitation and Logistics Outpost (HALO)
11 Although NASA is leading the Artemis program, it will still rely on international partnerships to establish a sustainable
presence on the Moon. As of June 2021, 12 nations have signed the Artemis Accords, a framework that establishes a shared
vision for space exploration and commercial activity.
12 Not covered by the FAR, Space Act Agreements provide NASA with the ability to advance science and technology and
stimulate industry to start new endeavors. See National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2010,
Pub. L. No. 111-267, 124 Stat. 2805 (2010).
13 For acquisition of Gateway’s two initial elements, NASA chose a fixed-price contract using FAR Part 35, Research and
Development Contracting (2019) and NASA Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement (NFS) 1835.016, Research and
Development Contracting—Broad Agency Announcements (March 2020) relating to research and development contracting
and the use of Broad Agency Announcements to leverage commercial capabilities. These announcements are used to
acquire basic and applied research in addition to Announcements of Opportunity using NFS 1872, Acquisition of Flight
Investigations (March 2020).
14 NASA OIG, NASA’s Management of Space Launch System Program Costs and Contracts (IG-20-012, March 10, 2020)
and NASA’s Management of the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle Program (IG-20-018, July 16, 2020).
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 8
systems, NASA utilized firm-fixed-price Broad Agency Announcements to solicit for commercial
companies to develop space capabilities for use beyond low Earth orbit.15 NASA chose these fixed-price
research and development contracts to enable public-private partnerships in which the companies take
on a significant portion of development costs.
16 However, the NASA Assistant Administrator for
Procurement granted a deviation to the “research only” clause in the FAR to gain the efficiencies of a
commercial partnership that included cost-sharing and allowed the eventual purchase of the PPE, HALO,
and the first demonstration mission for the HLS.
HLS Procurement Plans
In October 2019, NASA solicited proposals from industry to facilitate the rapid development and
demonstration of an HLS to deliver a crew to the Moon by 2024. Five companies submitted proposals
and NASA ultimately selected and provided initial funding to three—Blue Origin Federation, LLC (Blue
Origin) for $479.7 million; Dynetics, Inc. (Dynetics) for $239.7 million; and SpaceX for $139.6 million—
using firm-fixed-price research and development contracts under FAR Part 35. NASA identified several
required milestone reviews, including a Certification Baseline Review and Continuation Review, which
the contractors needed to include in their proposals, but otherwise the Agency gave the contractors the
flexibility to include their own milestones and associated payments as part of their submissions.17
Following this base period award, NASA intended to foster a competitive environment to drive cost
savings and enhance capabilities through the subsequent award of two development contracts for the
Artemis program’s initial lunar landings: one to a contractor to build a spacecraft to conduct the first
Moon landing in 2024 and the second to a contractor to demonstrate its lander in 2026.
HEOMD and HLS officials have repeatedly noted that having multiple contractors would encourage
innovation and drive down costs through competition. However, in FY 2021 NASA received $850 million
in HLS funding from Congress, substantially less than the $3.4 billion it requested. Due in part to this
reduction, in April 2021 NASA awarded a single company—SpaceX—a firm-fixed-price contract for a
potential total value of $2.9 billion to further develop and demonstrate its HLS by ferrying astronauts
between a lunar orbit and the lunar surface on the Artemis III mission.18
15 Gateway’s initial elements consist of the PPE, which powers and propels the spacecraft in orbit, and the HALO, which
provides a docking location for the Orion capsule and living and working spaces for crewmembers staying less than 30 days.
NASA instituted the Next Space Technologies for Exploration Partnerships-2 (NextSTEP-2) for commercial companies to
develop space capabilities for use beyond low Earth orbit. NextSTEP is a partnership model between NASA and the private
sector that seeks commercial development of deep space exploration capabilities to support more extensive human space
flight missions in and beyond cislunar space, the space near Earth that extends just beyond the Moon. There have been two
NextSTEP announcements, one in 2014 and the other in 2016. The first NextSTEP sought proposals from U.S. industry for
concept studies and technology development for advanced propulsion, habitation, and small satellites. NextSTEP-2 included
all U.S. and non-U.S. institutions and covered areas such as prototypes for habitation systems, power and propulsion system
studies, and HLS studies and demonstrations.
16 FAR Part 35, NFS 1835.016.
17 During the Certification Baseline Review milestone, NASA examined the progress of each contractor toward the design of
their HLS and established design, construction, safety, health, and medical standards for each system. The Continuation
Review allowed the companies to provide additional details to NASA on their respective designs, mission plans, hardware,
and software.
18 Blue Origin and Dynetics protested the SpaceX award to the Government Accountability Office (GAO), and both protests
were denied in July 2021. Shortly thereafter, Blue Origin, in effect, appealed this decision by filing a bid protest lawsuit
with the U.S. Court of Federal Claims, which caused NASA and SpaceX to halt work on SpaceX’s HLS demonstration contract.
In November 2021, this protest was also denied.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 9
In awarding SpaceX the demonstration contract, NASA noted that SpaceX’s HLS spacecraft still had
technology that needed to be matured, measured by what is known as a Technology Readiness Level
(TRL).19 Specifically, SpaceX’s design needed to mature a complex propulsion system and an
unprecedented propellant transfer system within the Earth’s orbit. To support a successful
demonstration, SpaceX will need to test fly its HLS prototype, develop and fly its Super Heavy rocket
booster for its launch vehicle, practice refueling operations in low Earth orbit, and demonstrate an
uncrewed HLS mission. As of August 2021, SpaceX has flown several test flights of its upper stage
Starship prototype—the basis for what will become the HLS—and currently plans to test fly its Super
Heavy rocket booster in late 2021.
To meet a 2024 launch date, NASA and SpaceX will
need to navigate a number of programmatic
milestones to ensure the HLS is meeting Agency
requirements as critical technology continues to
mature (see Figure 4).20 Specifically, NASA is
planning its HLS Key Decision Point (KDP) C—the
milestone that allows the program to move from
early design work to final design and fabrication—
for 8 months after the contract receives a NASA
directed Authority to Proceed and SpaceX data
becomes available to NASA. Following that, NASA's
Standing Review Board will participate in contractor
led reviews as well as all of NASA’s KDPs. For its
part, SpaceX needs to complete a series of tests
demonstrating different aspects of its HLS
operations, as well as serve as the lead for a Critical
Design Review and Design Certification Review—
reviews needed to ensure the HLS can enter into
final fabrication, assembly, integration, and testing.
NASA’s Standing Review Board will participate in
each of those contractor-led reviews.
19 NASA categorizes space technologies into TRLs 1 through 9. At TRL 1, scientific research is in the early stage compared to
TRL 9 when the technology has been proven on a successful flight. NASA and GAO guidelines state that critical technologies
should be at least at a TRL 6—at a model or prototype demonstration in a relevant environment—at the time a project
completes its Preliminary Design Review (a checkpoint in the design life cycle before hardware manufacturing can begin).
TRL levels for the Artemis-related space flight systems can be found in Appendix C.
20 The milestone reviews include completing Key Decision Point (KDP) C in July 2022, which will move the program from
Formulation to Implementation; a Critical Design Review in the third quarter of FY 2023; and annual synchronization reviews
thereafter.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 10
Figure 4: HLS Milestone Schedule (as of August 2021) and SpaceX HLS Schedule
(as of December 2020)
Source: NASA OIG presentation of Agency data.
Note: SpaceX schedule information does not reflect impacts from the bid protests and stay of performance.
Since NASA had only enough funds to award a single HLS initial demonstration contract, it has
accelerated its LETS acquisition and created additional opportunities for industry to receive research and
development funding from NASA for lunar landers. On September 14, 2021, NASA announced
firm-fixed-price awards with a total potential value of $146 million to Blue Origin, Dynetics, Lockheed
Martin, Northrop Grumman, and SpaceX for research and development services that are unique to each
provider’s HLS designs. These awards are intended to help prepare industry to be competitive for an
award under the LETS procurement.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 11
ARTEMIS PROGRAM MAKING PROGRESS BUT
TIMETABLE SLIPPING BY MONTHS FOR TEST
FLIGHTS AND YEARS FOR LUNAR LANDING
NASA’s initial three Artemis missions—which are expected to culminate in a crewed lunar landing—face
varying degrees of technical difficulties and delays that will push launch schedules from months to years
past their current goals. With all necessary elements for the Artemis I mission now being integrated and
tested at Kennedy, we estimate that NASA is progressing toward a launch by summer 2022 (a projected
slip of about 6 months attributable to technical challenges, the COVID-19 pandemic, and multiple
weather events—compared to the target date of November 2021). With Artemis II currently scheduled
to launch in late 2023, NASA is facing longer schedule delays—until at least mid-2024—due to the
second mission’s reuse of Orion components from Artemis I. Finally, given the time needed to develop
and fully test the HLS and NASA’s next-generation spacesuits, the Agency will exceed its current
timetable of landing humans on the Moon in late 2024 by several years.
Artemis I Progressing Toward Launch by Summer 2022
Four years after the presidential directive that initiated what would become the Artemis program,
but more than 10 years into development of its SLS rocket and Orion capsule, NASA’s preparations are
nearly complete for its inaugural flight of its rocket/capsule combination. The Orion Crew Module was
delivered to Kennedy in January 2021, and following completion of its Green Run tests the SLS Core
Stage was delivered to Kennedy in late April 2021.21 Since then, the EGS Program has been assembling
the SLS/Orion configuration and testing the integrated system for the first time. Despite missing
Artemis I’s revised Agency Baseline Commitment (ABC) launch date of November 2021, ESD officials
are confident the integration and launch will be completed in spring 2022, with a higher probability of
launch—in our estimation—by summer 2022.
22
The need for a second hot fire test of the SLS Core Stage rocket, along with the impacts of several
hurricanes, delayed necessary pre-launch ground operations which were estimated to take
10 months to complete following receipt of the Core Stage at Kennedy.
23 NASA’s first hot fire test on
January 16, 2021, was shut down after just 1 minute—far short of the 8-minute objective—due to
conservative testing parameters intended to reduce the risk of damaging the Core Stage during the test.
Prior to the second attempt of the hot fire test, scheduled for February 25, 2021, engineers were forced
21 The Green Run is a series of eight tests on the SLS’s Core Stage flight hardware, culminating with a hot fire test. These tests
verify the stage is ready for the first and future Artemis missions.
22 An ABC establishes and documents an integrated set of project requirements, cost, schedule, technical content, and an
agreed Joint Cost and Schedule Confidence Level that forms the basis for NASA’s commitment to the Office of Management
and Budget and Congress. The original 2014 SLS ABC established a goal to launch in December 2017 and a commitment to
launch by November 2018. The SLS and EGS Programs were rebaselined in early 2020 to a November 2021 Artemis I ABC
launch date. This assessment did not include COVID-19 impacts, as it occurred prior to the onset of the pandemic.
23 The 10 months accounts for integration activities, technical risks, and uncertainties.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 12
to repair a valve in the Core Stage main propulsion system, resulting in further delays. Finally, on
March 18, 2021, the hot fire test was completed with the Core Stage firing its engines for over
8 minutes. Following a planned month of engine refurbishment and travel by barge from Stennis Space
Center, the Core Stage arrived at Kennedy on April 27, 2021, nearly 3 months after the intended date.
As a result of these delays, the COVID-19 pandemic, multiple weather events, and the 10 months
required for integration and testing, Artemis I will not be ready to launch until at least late
February 2022, 3 months after its ABC launch readiness date. EGS Program schedules and a June 2021
HEOMD Schedule Risk Analysis (SRA) cite a risk-informed launch readiness date of mid-April 2022.24
In our judgment, the Agency is on track to launch Artemis I by summer 2022. While first-time
integration issues may cause additional delays, NASA currently reports no remaining major issues.
Specifically, flight and ground software are at a mature state and require only minor modifications, the
Core Stage passed its hot fire test, and an issue with a redundant component in one of Orion’s six power
and data units was waived for Artemis I.25
Artemis II Delayed Until at Least Mid-2024 Due to
Artemis I Dependencies and Reuse of Orion Avionics
Artemis II is currently scheduled to launch in late 2023, though NASA is likely to face schedule delays due
to the reuse and installation of Orion components following Artemis I and a tight delivery schedule of
the Orion service module. After the Orion capsule is recovered from the Pacific Ocean at the conclusion
of the Artemis I mission, ESD personnel plan to refurbish and reuse several of its non-core avionics
systems in the Artemis II Orion.26 This avionics reuse, which is driven entirely by when the Orion capsule
returns from its first mission, is considered the primary critical path for Artemis II.27 Another key
Artemis II component requiring integration is the service module. Built by Airbus in Bremen, Germany,
for the European Space Agency (ESA), the Artemis II Service Module was delivered to Kennedy for
integration with the Orion Crew Module in October 2021, a date that had already slipped by several
months due to impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and numerous technical issues. Orion Program
officials were tracking delivery of the Service Module as a top program risk for Artemis II.
In preparation for the crewed Artemis II launch, NASA will also install an Environmental Control and Life
Support System on the capsule. The Agency opted not to fly Artemis I with an operational life support
system citing cost savings and lack of crew on the flight. However, as we previously reported, in
contradiction to the “test like you fly” qualification approach, Artemis II—with astronauts on board—will
24 An SRA analyzes the potential impact of schedule uncertainties and risks to determine the likelihood that a program plan
is achievable. The SRA can inform program management of priority schedule risks and adequacy of schedule margins.
25 In November 2020, engineers identified an issue with a redundant component on one of Orion’s power and data unit
communications cards. Given the limited accessibility to this unit, NASA determined that disassembling the Crew Module
Adapter to address the faulty component would put the spacecraft at higher risk of damage than not addressing the issue.
NASA elected to accept the risk and proceeded into integration without replacing the component.
26 Avionics refers to the spacecraft’s electronics systems and includes its communications, navigations, display, and flight
control systems.
27 The critical path refers to the sequential path of tasks in a schedule that represents the longest overall duration from the
present time through project completion. Any slippage of these tasks will increase the project’s duration.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 13
be the first flight using this system, a situation that presents an operational and safety risk.
28 The
Program plans to mitigate the risk by remaining in the Earth’s orbit for the mission’s first 2 days to
ensure a fuller assessment of the life support system’s performance before continuing on to the Moon.
Other modifications between the first two flights include upgrades to the Mobile Launcher 1 including
an Emergency Egress System for astronauts and an Environmental Control System.
29 While not all
upgrades will occur between the Artemis I and II launches, those planned are estimated to take about
5 months.
Between the reuse of avionics, installation of vital components, integration and testing, modifications
and upgrades to launch facilities, and other ground operations, Artemis II preparations following
completion of the Artemis I mission will take approximately 27 months. Reusing some components
between the first two launches mean that Orion’s readiness issues after Artemis I—if they are realized—
could delay the Artemis II launch until mid-2024—several months later than NASA’s current plans.30
NASA has attempted to mitigate Artemis II’s schedule risk by initiating the purchase of an additional set
of avionics should the Artemis I launch schedule continue to slip, thereby decoupling the Artemis II
launch schedule from Artemis I.
Time Needed for Development, Testing, and
Certification of the HLS and Spacesuits Will Delay
Planned Lunar Landing Schedule by Several Years
HLS Development Schedule Is Unrealistic and Not Supported
by Recent Schedule Risk Analysis
We found the HLS development schedule to be unrealistic when compared to other major NASA space
flight programs. Specifically, space flight programs in the last 15 years have taken on average about
8.5 years from contract award to first operational flight and the HLS Program is attempting to do so in
about half that time (see Figure 5).
31
28 The “test like you fly” approach tests the spacecraft utilizing the same hardware, software, people, and processes that will
be utilized during mission operations. We discussed this risk in our 2017 report, NASA’s Plans for Human Exploration Beyond
Low Earth Orbit (IG-17-017, April 13, 2017).
29 The mobile launcher is the ground structure that will be used to assemble, process, and launch the combined SLS/Orion
spacecraft from Launch Pad 39B at Kennedy.
30 Since there is no component reuse between Artemis II and III, ESD will only require 6 to 12 months to complete ground
operations between those launches.
31 For reference, the Apollo Lunar Lander took approximately 6 years from contract award to its launch on the Apollo 11
mission (the first landing of humans on the Moon). That said, Apollo lander development received substantially higher levels
of funding controlled for inflation.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 14
Figure 5: Time to Operational Flight for Recent NASA Space Flight Programs
Source: NASA OIG presentation of Agency data.
Further, while recent space flight programs have on average taken about 2 years between test and
operational flights, SpaceX plans to launch its crewed HLS 1.2 years after its uncrewed demonstration
mission. To their credit, the company’s rapid “design-build-fly” testing approach and in-house
production facilities are unique capabilities that may allow for faster development and production
timelines than previous NASA space flight programs.
32 During our August 2021 visit to both its California
and Texas facilities, we observed SpaceX’s rapid production ability with 20 Starship prototypes and
100 Raptor engines built to date. This fast pace is possible due in part to the fact that SpaceX
manufactures many engine parts and components in-house, which also reduces costs. The launch tower
at the company’s Starbase in Texas was nearing completion with fueling facilities expected to be
completed by October 2021. For its next major tests, SpaceX intends to launch the Super Heavy rocket
booster and HLS into the Earth’s orbit by the end of 2021 with a demonstration of its in-orbit fueling
operations planned for late 2022. Nonetheless, delays in its current timetable are likely given the
technologies that must be developed and the tight schedule.
A February 2020 HEOMD-directed SRA prepared by the Aerospace Corporation found an HLS would
likely not be ready until mid-2026.33 Subsequent to that SRA, the HLS Program encountered a series of
delays, including 6 weeks in awarding the development and demonstration contract in April 2021 and a
nearly 4-month delay caused by the bid protests from Blue Origin and Dynetics over NASA’s award to
SpaceX. Combined, these events contributed to 6 months in program delays and do not factor into
ongoing delays due to Blue Origin’s late August 2021 lawsuit in the U.S. Court of Federal Claims. Based
on the HLS base period contract award date (May 2020) and the average delay for recent major NASA
space flight programs, we estimate the HLS Program could face up to 3.4 years of delays before
32 SpaceX’s philosophy involves extensively testing and flying their vehicles as early as possible—made possible by rapid
in-house manufacturing capabilities that provide a steady stream of hardware—to aggressively reduce risks and acquire
flight data.
33 As a part of the Continuation Review in December 2020, SpaceX also conducted an SRA that projected a 2024 landing was
possible. SpaceX officials told us this projection will need to be refined once the Blue Origin litigation is concluded and data
exchanges can begin again.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 15
operational flights begin (see Figure 6). As a contingency plan, ESD officials raised the possibility of using
Artemis III to complete an additional fly-by of the Moon rather than a lunar landing mission should
necessary systems not be available in time.
Figure 6: Historical Delays in Operational Space Flights
Source: NASA OIG presentation of Agency data.
Note: Operational flights for Boeing Crew and SLS are estimates based on Agency statements.
Spacesuits Encountering Continuous Delays
Prior to 2019, NASA planned to design, test, develop, and provide next-generation Exploration
Extravehicular Mobility Unit (xEMU) spacesuits to the ISS by 2023 and to the Artemis III mission by 2028.
However, when the timeline for Artemis III was accelerated, NASA was required to fast-track its
schedule by 4 years. Since then, delivery of the spacesuits necessary for lunar expeditions have been
delayed due to technical challenges, funding shortfalls, and COVID-19 impacts. AES schedules indicate
that the projected delivery date for the ISS demonstration and Artemis III spacesuits is December 2024.
Given the subsequent integration requirements, the suits will not be ready for flight until May 2025 at
the earliest, making the suits and associated hardware unavailable for a planned 2024 lunar landing.
In August 2021, we reported that given the projected delays and lack of contingency plans, the current
pace of spacesuit development will preclude a 2024 crewed lunar landing.34 We also projected that by
the time two flight-ready spacesuits are completed, NASA will have spent over a billion dollars on the
development and assembly of its next-generation spacesuits, along with development of associated
Extravehicular Activity (EVA) tools and equipment and upgrade of aging EVA facilities and infrastructure.
Going forward, NASA officials told us that they plan to reduce technical risks for a future services
34 IG-21-025.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 16
contract by using an online Technical Library for spacesuit components and assemblies accessible by
potential contractors, and through planned on-orbit testing of spacesuit components to increase their
technical maturity. While this will be helpful for companies competing for and receiving a spacesuit
contract, even with these modifications in approach, we determined the new spacesuits will still not be
ready by 2024.
Gateway Experiencing Technical Development and Funding
Issues
Though not required to support the Artemis III lunar landing, NASA is moving forward with development
of the Gateway for sustained lunar operations. However, the Gateway Program continues to work with
technical and schedule risks associated with its Advanced Electric Propulsion System—a solar electric
system that will be used to propel the PPE.
35 The PPE is expected to be three times more powerful and
require less propellant than current satellite platforms and is responsible for transporting itself and the
HALO to Near Rectilinear Halo Orbit. Illustrating the severity of the risk, hardware delivery for the
Advanced Electric Propulsion System is not only considered the top risk to the Gateway Program, but to
the AES Division as well.
In announcing the contract award to SpaceX to launch a co-manifested PPE and HALO on a single rocket,
NASA signaled a no-earlier-than launch date of May 2024. With a 10-month travel time to Near
Rectilinear Halo Orbit, the earliest the Gateway could arrive in the designated orbit is March 2025, as we
projected in our 2020 report.36 A March 2025 arrival would render the Gateway unavailable to serve as
communications support for a 2024 lunar landing. In addition, program schedules indicate further
Gateway launch delays until November 2024—with zero schedule margin—which would result in an
initial operating capability for the Gateway of September 2025. However, a Gateway Program SRA
indicated a less than 1 percent chance of meeting this replanned launch date, with a late 2025 or early
2026 date more likely.
Funding instability has forced various mission changes and delays within the Program, which ultimately
impact the overall cost and schedule. Early estimates for the Gateway Program required $3.7 billion
over 5 years in order to deploy a configuration of Gateway in lunar orbit by 2024. However, the FY 2021
President's Budget Request for Gateway was $2.7 billion and reflected the elimination of the U.S.
Habitation Module, which would have provided additional living and working space on the Gateway;
a delayed Authority to Proceed for the Gateway Logistics Services contract; a schedule slip into at least
2025 for PPE and HALO initial operating capability in Near Rectilinear Halo Orbit; and a strong reliance
on international partners for full system capability.
37 Between FY 2021 appropriations and the FY 2022
President's Budget Request, though, Gateway funding projections are now back to $3.7 billion.
38
35 NASA OIG, NASA’s Management of the Gateway Program for Artemis Missions (IG-21-004, November 10, 2020).
36 IG-21-004.
37 NASA plans to procure logistics services—for delivery of cargo, science experiments, and supplies—for the Gateway that will
be provided under the Gateway Logistics Services contract.
38 In 2020, the Gateway Program projected a funding estimate of approximately $892 million for FY 2021; however, the
Program only received $699 million, or 22 percent less than estimated.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 17
NASA Developing Artemis Mission Schedules
Though individual NASA divisions have their own integrated master schedules (IMS), the AES Division is
working to create mission specific IMSs that will incorporate schedule information from both AES and
ESD programs, starting with Artemis III. The IMSs will serve as a bottoms-up schedule that incorporates
program inputs from both summary and detailed schedules. Programs will also identify and report on
key performance milestones each quarter, with the corresponding data being leveraged for additional
schedule analyses like SRAs. AES is currently identifying cross-program interdependencies with ESD
programs to ensure that the schedules—starting with Artemis III—properly reflect linkages between
divisions. Completion of the Artemis III IMS is reliant upon successful contract awards and Authorities to
Proceed, particularly with the HLS Program and Exploration Extravehicular Activity (xEVA) Project.
While the AES-ESD schedule covers the main Artemis activities, we found the draft version is missing
information from programs and projects outside of the mission critical path. As we note in Table 2
(see page 22), several NASA organizations outside of AES and ESD (e.g., Lunar Discovery Exploration
Program, Space Technology Mission Directorate, Mission Support Directorate) are important to the
overall Artemis mission and have the potential to affect mission success. Both the Government
Accountability Office’s (GAO) and NASA’s scheduling best practices dictate that a comprehensive IMS
should identify and sequence all program activities so interdependencies can be captured.39 Further,
HEOMD’s 2020 Program Status Assessment recommended a “single, authoritative risk informed master
schedule” for the Artemis program.40 While we recognize that the Artemis program is not a formalized
program according to NASA policy—and is thus not subject to specific procedural requirements related
to such programs—a regularly updated, NASA-wide IMS would provide more complete and timelier
schedule insight for the entire Artemis mission, rather than just programs within AES and ESD.
39 GAO, Schedule Assessment Guide: Best Practices for Project Schedules (GAO-16-89G, December 2015) and NASA/SP-2010-
3403, Revision 1, NASA Schedule Management Handbook (January 30, 2020).
40 Comprised of NASA personnel and outside aerospace experts, the Program Status Assessment examined planned activities to
achieve a human lunar landing by 2024, reviewing early Artemis architecture, management and integration across programs,
schedule risks, technical risks, technical systems engineering integration, and test program thoroughness.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 18
NASA’S ESTIMATES SIGNIFICANTLY UNDERSTATE
COSTS OF ARTEMIS PROGRAM
NASA lacks a comprehensive and accurate cost estimate that accounts for all Artemis program costs.
Instead, the Agency’s Artemis Plan presents a rough estimate of the costs for the first three missions
between FYs 2021 and 2025 that excludes $25 billion for key activities related to planned missions
beyond Artemis III. When aggregating all relevant costs across mission directorates, we found that
NASA is projected to spend $93 billion on the Artemis effort from FY 2012 through FY 2025.41 Moreover,
while NASA has several initiatives underway aimed at increasing affordability, we project the current
production cost of a single SLS/Orion system to be $4.1 billion per launch. Looking ahead, without
capturing, accurately reporting, and reducing the cost of future SLS/Orion missions, the Agency will face
significant challenges to sustaining its Artemis program in its current configuration.
NASA Lacks a Credible Cost Estimate for the Artemis
Missions
NASA does not have a credible estimate that consolidates all Artemis costs across mission directorates.
As a result of NASA’s decision not to classify Artemis as a formal program under the Agency’s Space
Flight Program and Project Management Requirements, program officials were not required to develop
an Artemis-wide full life-cycle cost estimate. Instead, NASA’s disparate programs and projects
individually submit budget estimates through their directorates and divisions to the Office of the Chief
Financial Officer.
42 However, the Agency does not consolidate cost estimates into an overall Artemis
projection. Currently, the only publicly available Artemis cost projections are in NASA’s Lunar
Exploration Program Overview—"the Artemis Plan”—released in September 2020 (see Table 1).
41 In April 2021, NASA OIG released the Artemis Status Update (IG-21-018), which cites total Artemis-related costs of $86 billion
from FY 2012 through FY 2025. The $93 billion estimate cited in this report updates that previous estimate by including
Artemis costs from outside of HEOMD and using the FY 2021 Budget Operating Plan for FY 2021 costs (rather than FY 2021
appropriations) and the FY 2022 President's Budget Request. Additionally, our cost projections begin in FY 2012 because that
is the year the SLS and Orion Programs began Artemis-related work in earnest.
42 The Office of the Chief Financial Officer is responsible for the official listing of Agency-approved programs and projects and
tracking performance against individual Agency-approved project cost and schedule commitments.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 19
Table 1: Artemis Phase 1 Funding Requirements (Dollars in Millions)
Artemis Elements FY 2021 FY 2022 FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 Total
Orion/SLS/EGS
Initial Human Landing System
Lunar Suits
Surface Logistics
Exploration Technologies
Lunar Discovery and Exploration Program
Total Phase I Requirements
$2,894.7
3,222.5
177.3
67.6
251.0
451.5
$7,064.7
$2,070.6
3,553.1
141.0
69.2
292.0
517.3
$6,643.1
$1,487.6
4,100.4
94.2
141.9
268.0
491.3
$6,583.4
$919.0
3,571.3
63.1
196.0
223.0
458.3
$5,430.7
$252.0
1,719.0
42.5
77.7
158.0
0.0
$2,249.2
$7,623.9
16,166.4
518.1
552.4
1,192.0
1,918.3
$27,971.1
Source: NASA’s Lunar Exploration Program Overview, Appendix 5: Artemis Plan Funding Requirements (September 2020).
Note: Amounts are rounded. Totals may not equal the sum of the rounded amounts. Lunar Discovery and Exploration Program does not
have any estimated funding requirements in FY 2025 because, under a 2024 lunar landing schedule, its activities related to Artemis III will be
completed by 2024.
According to the Artemis Plan, returning astronauts to the surface of the Moon by 2024 would cost
nearly $28 billion between FYs 2021 and 2025.43 However, this projection is limited to funding required
for Phase 1 of NASA’s two-phase lunar exploration strategy. Phase 1 is the near-term focus on achieving
the initial human landing by 2024—costs directly associated with the first three Artemis missions.
Phase 2 is defined as the development and deployment of sustainable systems that will allow America’s
human space flight program to maintain a robust lunar presence into the next decade—Artemis IV and
beyond. The $28 billion excludes funding for any system not directly necessary for Artemis I, II, or III,
including the SLS Block 1B—the next, more powerful iteration of the SLS heavy-lift rocket—and
Mobile Launcher 2— the ground platform that will launch Block 1B to the Moon—as well as future Orion
capsules and the Gateway, all of which are in various stages of development or production.44
Best practices for developing reliable cost estimates are grounded on the precepts that the estimate
should be comprehensive, well-documented, accurate, and credible.45 NASA officials maintained that
the total Phase 1 funding requirement contained in Table 1 was not an “official cost estimate” and
instead was largely compiled using program and project estimates from the FY 2021 President’s Budget
Request. Given the exclusion of Phase 2 costs, the Artemis Plan is certainly not comprehensive or
consistent with cost estimating best practices. In addition, ESD Programs—SLS, Orion, and EGS—do not
track costs by Artemis mission. We therefore question the accuracy of cost information for the Artemis
Plan’s funding table, which specifically includes costs for the Artemis I, II, and III missions only. While
the cost estimates in NASA’s Artemis Plan provides important context about the level of funding needed
for near-term Artemis missions, it lacks the comprehensiveness, analytical rigor, and credibility of an
Artemis program-wide cost estimate. By failing to develop an official cost estimate that includes all
relevant costs, NASA is underreporting the true funding requirements for a long-term Artemis program.
43 NASA’s Lunar Exploration Program Overview, Appendix 5: Artemis Phase 1 Funding Requirements (September 2020).
44 On August 26, 2021, NASA OIG announced that it would be conducting an audit of NASA’s management of the Mobile
Launcher 2 contract.
45 GAO, Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide: Best Practices for Developing and Managing Program Costs (GAO-20-195G,
March 12, 2020).
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 20
Total Artemis Costs Expected to Reach $93 Billion
by 2025
To account for all Artemis costs for FYs 2021 through 2025, including Phase 2 projects like the SLS
Block 1B, Mobile Launcher 2, and Gateway, we found that $25 billion should be added to the Artemis
Plan’s estimated costs, increasing the total costs over this 5-year period to $53 billion. Furthermore,
when considering the $40 billion already spent on the Artemis mission from FYs 2012 to 2020, the total
projected cost through FY 2025 becomes $93 billion.46 The $93 billion reflects the cost of supporting
Artemis throughout NASA’s directorates and divisions, particularly HEOMD and the Science Mission
Directorate. See Table 2 for the breakdown of full Artemis mission costs from FYs 2012 to 2025.
46 We used NASA’s official accounting system to capture program costs from FYs 2012 through 2020, segregating Artemis-
related work by Work Breakdown Structure code. For FYs 2021 through 2025, we used the FY 2021 Budget Operating Plan,
FY 2022 President’s Budget Request, and FY 2021 President’s Budget Request and accounted for additional costs such as the
development of the SLS Block 1B configuration, Mobile Launcher 2, and Gateway; production of future Orion capsules; and
mission support to calculate the $25 billion added to the $28 billion NASA projection for the same time period.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 21
Table 2: Artemis Cost Breakdown and Budget Projection through FY 2025 (as of August 2021, Dollars in
Millions)
Program/Project FYs 2012 -
2020
FY 2021 FY 2022 FY 2023 FY 2024 FY 2025 Total
Exploration Systems
Development
Orion
Space Launch System
Exploration Ground Systems
Advanced Exploration Systems
Human Landing System
Gateway
Extravehicular Spacesuit
Developmenta
Exploration Research and
Developmentb
Lunar Discovery and
Exploration Program
Other Space Technologiesc
Mission Supportd
Total
$32,878.4
11,398.8
17,233.6
4,246.0
1,280.5
577.8
702.7
174.2
3,327.9
605.1
1,237.5
498.3
$40,001.9
$4,544.6
1,403.7
2,560.9
580.0
1,627.1
928.3
698.8
N/A
345.7
443.5
1,211.4
1,551.0
$9,723.3
$4,483.7
1,406.7
2,487.0
590.0
1,980.0
1,195.0
785.0
N/A
416.7
497.3
1,442.0
1,506.0
$10,325.7
$4,384.0
1,340.0
2,486.0
558.0
2,077.2
1,266.7
810.5
N/A
552.9
501.3
1,658.0
1,501.0
$10,674.4
$4,219.0
1,239.0
2,466.0
514.0
2,344.5
1,579.5
765.0
N/A
700.2
458.3
1,756.0
1,492.0
$10,970.0
$3,888.0
1,084.0
2,290.0
514.0
2,659.0
1,989.0
670.0
N/A
967.9
458.3
1,854.0
1,440.0
$11,267.2
$54,397.7
17,872.2
29,523.5
7,002.0
11,968.3
7,536.3
4,432.0
$174.2
6,311.3
2,963.8
9,158.9
7,988.3
$92,962.5
Source: Costs are based on total obligations from NASA’s official accounting system (FYs 2012 through 2020), FY 2021 Budget Operating Plan,
FY 2021 President’s Budget Request, and FY 2022 President’s Budget Request (FYs 2021 through 2025).
a Prior to FY 2020, extravehicular spacesuit development was funded through multiple NASA entities including the ISS Program. In FY 2020,
funding was split between those entities and the Gateway Program and starting in FY 2021, funding for spacesuits was budgeted in the Gateway
Program. As a result, spacesuit funding is no longer applicable in the Extravehicular Spacesuit Development line as of FY 2021 and is instead
reflected in the Gateway funding line.
b Exploration Research and Development includes Other Advanced Exploration Systems, Advanced Cislunar and Surface Capabilities, and the
Human Research Program.
c Other Space Technologies includes Space Technology and Space Communications and Navigation. The Space Technology Mission Directorate
portfolio consists of thousands of projects, activities, grants, and contracts which support technology investments benefiting multiple
stakeholders, including the Artemis program. The total Space Technology obligations (FYs 2019 through 2020) reflected in the table above,
within the Other Space Technologies line item, represent a high-level estimate and may be inclusive of activities which are not solely Artemis-
specific.
d Mission Support includes Safety, Security, and Mission Services and Construction and Environmental Compliance and Restoration.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 22
SLS/Orion Production and Operating Costs Will Average
Over $4 Billion Per Launch
We project the cost to fly a single SLS/Orion system through at least Artemis IV to be $4.1 billion per
launch at a cadence of approximately one mission per year.47 Building and launching one Orion capsule
costs approximately $1 billion, with an additional $300 million for the Service Module supplied by the
ESA through a barter agreement in exchange for ESA’s responsibility for ISS common system operating
costs, transportation costs to the ISS, and other ISS supporting services. In addition, we estimate the
single-use SLS will cost $2.2 billion to produce, including two rocket stages, two solid rocket boosters,
four RS-25 engines, and two stage adapters. Ground systems located at Kennedy where the launches
will take place—the Vehicle Assembly Building, Crawler-Transporter, Mobile Launcher 1, Launch Pad,
and Launch Control Center—are estimated to cost $568 million per year due to the large support
structure that must be maintained. The $4.1 billion total cost represents production of the rocket and
the operations needed to launch the SLS/Orion system including materials, labor, facilities, and
overhead, but does not include any money spent either on prior development of the system or for next-
generation technologies such as the SLS’s Exploration Upper Stage, Orion’s docking system, or Mobile
Launcher 2. Figure 7 provides a breakout of the operating cost per launch for the SLS/Orion system.
47 The cost per launch was calculated as follows: $1 billion for the Orion based on information provided by ESD officials and
NASA OIG analysis; $300 million for the ESA’s Service Module based on the value of a barter agreement between ESA and
the United States in which ESA provides the service modules in exchange for offsetting its ISS responsibilities; $2.2 billion
for the SLS based on program budget submissions and analysis of contracts; and $568 million for EGS costs related to the
SLS/Orion launch as provided by ESD officials.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 23
Figure 7: Estimated SLS and Orion Operating Costs Per Launch
Source: NASA OIG presentation and analysis of Agency data.
NASA has spent billions of dollars to date on the design, development, testing, and evaluation of the ESD
systems needed for the Artemis missions, and expects significant cost savings once the systems reach
sustaining operations. Although NASA has worked diligently to find production efficiencies and other
cost-saving measures—such as HEOMD’s establishment of a review team in January 2021 to examine
methods to reduce the high cost of a single launch—the system will remain extremely costly due to sole
sourcing the SLS and Orion follow on-production awards, continuing to use cost-plus contracts, and the
high cost of ground support. Moreover, except for the Orion capsule, its subsystems, and supporting
launch facilities, all components are expendable and “single use” unlike emerging commercial space
flight systems such as SpaceX’s HLS Starship and Dragon capsule/Falcon 9 booster.
A myriad of interrelated factors contribute to the high cost of ESD Programs, many of which we reported
on in the past several years.48 First, in the NASA Authorization Act of 2010, Congress directed NASA to
incorporate preexisting Shuttle- and Constellation-era contracts and modify heritage equipment in
48 NASA OIG, Audit of NASA’s Development of Its Mobile Launchers (IG-20-013, March 17, 2020); NASA’s Management of the
Space Launch System Stages Contract (IG-19-001, October 10, 2018); IG-20-018; and IG-20-012.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 24
developing the SLS and Orion.
49 As such, these large development contracts—the SLS’s stages, boosters,
and engines and Orion’s capsule—were sole sourced, eliminating any potential cost benefits of
competition. Competing follow-on awards for production several years later became a non-starter due
to the high cost of a new contractor instituting its own manufacturing processes and building facilities—
a cost estimated at $4.5 billion for the Core and Exploration Upper Stages. Second, NASA continues to
use a cost-plus contracting structure even though it has experienced 3 years of delays and cost increases
of $4.3 billion for the three ESD Programs. Although NASA officials say they intend to transition to
potentially less costly fixed-price contracts, only the Orion Program has successfully negotiated a
fixed-price component in its production contract—but even that structure will not commence until
Artemis IX. Third, multiple contractors associated with the Artemis program have been permitted to
begin work without NASA adequately defining the contract’s specific terms. For example, the first
stages contract took 2 years before NASA and the contractor agreed on pricing and as of August 2021
NASA is still negotiating the follow-on production contracts for the SLS boosters and stages.50 Over
time, failure to agree on such key contract terms reduces the government’s ability to influence the final
pricing as it invests more and more time and money into a project.
Finally, NASA has not consistently used the award fee structure to incentivize better contractor
performance. Even when a contractor performed poorly, NASA provided award fees commensurate
with a company whose performance was very good or excellent. Despite being 3 years behind schedule
and billions over budget, Boeing averaged 86 percent in award fees for core stage production over the
life of the initial SLS Stages contract, receiving a “very good” rating. In another case, after a contracting
officer for the SLS booster office denied Northrop Grumman’s request multiple times over a 4-year
period for award fees on costly redesign work, the SLS Program ultimately conceded and recommended
an “excellent” award fee rating for work previously considered unsatisfactory.51 Additionally, in our
2020 examination of the Orion Program, we questioned $27.8 million in fees awarded to Lockheed
Martin from September 2006 to April 2015.52
Ongoing Affordability Initiatives and Commercial
Alternatives
While the SLS is required for the near-term transportation of astronauts beyond low Earth orbit, in our
judgment continuing to rely on such an expensive heavy-lift space flight system will inhibit NASA’s ability
to reach its long-term human exploration goals in a timeframe anywhere close to its stated schedule.
Transportation is only one aspect of deep space exploration with NASA requiring substantial funding for
the science, technology, and infrastructure required to sustain astronauts on the lunar surface and
ultimately Mars. Notably, HEOMD recognizes the need to enhance the affordability and
49 Pub. L. No. 111-267, 124 Stat. 2805. The Constellation Program was established during the George W. Bush Administration
in 2006 and canceled under the Obama Administration in 2010. Constellation was similar to Artemis in that it sought to
return humans to the Moon, explore the solar system, and promote international and commercial participation in space
exploration.
50 NFS 1843.7005(a), Definitization (2018) provides that NASA’s goal is to definitize contracts within 180 days—approximately
6 months—after issuance.
51 An award fee rating of “excellent” means the contractor exceeded almost all of the significant award fee criteria and met
overall management, cost management, technical performance, and several other criteria. A rating of “very good” means
the contractor exceeded many of the expectations.
52 IG-20-018.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 25
sustainability of ESD systems and is exploring options to this end. First, HEOMD was successful in
stabilizing the flight manifest—changes in missions and rocket configurations caused requirements
changes and thus increased costs with contractors.53 In January 2021, HEOMD’s Associate Administrator
informed the directorate that a senior advisor would be leading a sustainability assessment team to
develop ideas on how to make ESD systems more cost effective. Further, HEOMD directed its program
managers to include a roadmap for potential cost-saving actions as part of the recent FY 2023 budget
development process. The suggestions included collaboration with contractors on process
improvements, reductions of production cycle time, and a reduction in both the civil servant and
contractor work force, among others. However, with respect to specific commitments with contractors,
only the RS-25 new engine program has established cost reduction targets for its contractor—in this
case 33 percent—for the Agency to measure its progress.
In June 2021, the SLS Program forecasted a 13 percent reduction or approximately $5 million a month
in labor hours between the production of Core Stage 1 and Core Stage 2. NASA and Boeing are also
working on a 5-year project to optimize the Stages production areas at the Michoud Assembly Facility,
including rearranging the factory for better flow and integration sequencing and reducing downtime
for welding tools. Boeing plans to arrange a schedule to share welding structures for optimal efficiency,
as well as automating processes previously done by hand. However, achieving overall cost savings will
be challenging even with components such as the RS-25 engines and their 33 percent cost reduction
target given that the Space Shuttle-era engines were existing government-owned equipment with
modifications that included new engine controllers. In addition, NASA’s engine costs will soon
increase since the SLS Block 1 upper stage has only one RL-10 engine while the Block 1B configuration
requires four.54
As we reported in 2020, Orion is moving forward on a number of initiatives aimed at reducing
production costs.55 The Program plans to transition to a fixed-price contract structure for Artemis IX and
beyond. There are also plans to reuse high-value interior components such as avionics and life support
systems, light reuse of crew systems beginning on Artemis V, and/or reusing the assembled pressure
vessels and all interior components once for two missions beginning with Artemis VI. Additionally, NASA
hopes to leverage economies of scale and reduce costs by 21 percent by ordering Orion capsules in
batches of three, the most affordable approach for production as determined by NASA officials in 2019.
In the near-term, the SLS is the only launch vehicle with the capability to lift the 27-metric ton Orion
capsule to lunar orbit. However, in the next 5 to 7 years other human-rated commercial alternatives
may become available. These commercial ventures will likely capitalize on multiple technological
innovations, making them lighter, cheaper, and reusable. Further driving down costs is the competition
between aerospace companies such as SpaceX and Blue Origin. Although Congress mandated that NASA
build the SLS and Orion for its space exploration goals in 2010, the Agency may soon have more
affordable commercial options to carry humans to the Moon and beyond.56 In our judgment, the
53 For example, on July 23, 2021, NASA awarded a contract to SpaceX to launch the Europa Clipper science mission, rather than
an SLS.
54 NASA purchases the RL-10 engines on a contract separate from the Stages and Stages Production and Evolution Contract
contracts at a cost of $10.8 million each; therefore, the cost for the Block 1B upper stages engines will rise approximately
$32.4 million.
55 IG-20-018.
56 As an example, SpaceX is designing the Starship to fly astronauts from Earth to its destination and back on the same
spacecraft. Congress’s mandates are found in: Pub. L. No. 111-267, 124 Stat. 2805.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 26
Agency should continue to monitor the commercial development of heavy-lift space flight systems and
begin discussions of whether it makes financial and strategic sense to consider these options as part
of the Agency’s overall plan to support its ambitious space exploration goals. Figure 8 shows a
comparison of commercial medium- to heavy-lift launch vehicles that may become available in the
near-term.
Figure 8: Selected Near-Term Medium-to-Heavy Lift Launch Vehicle Comparisons
Source: NASA OIG depiction of Agency program and company information.
a In response to a NASA OIG request, Blue Origin declined to provide information about the New Glenn rocket. Data displayed in the table is from
publicly available sources and has not been confirmed with the company.
b Starship upmass capabilities to low Earth orbit and trans-lunar injection require multiple launches and in-space refueling.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 27
NASA’S MODIFIED ACQUISITION AND
MANAGEMENT APPROACHES FOR HLS WILL
REDUCE COSTS AND ENCOURAGE INNOVATION
BUT ALSO INCREASE RISK
NASA modified both its HLS acquisition and management approaches to reduce costs, encourage
innovation, and meet an aggressive schedule for its Artemis lunar landings. While its acquisition
approach relies on competition to drive down costs and ensure redundancy, the Agency selected only
one provider after receiving $2.5 billion less than requested for HLS development in FY 2021 alone.
To mitigate this constraint, the Agency is accelerating the LETS procurement. In September 2021
NASA awarded five contracts to companies to continue developing HLS capabilities, which are intended
to help prepare industry to be competitive for a future lunar transportation services award under the
LETS procurement. NASA has also worked diligently to solidify its HLS requirements and standards;
however, under the Agency’s tailored project management approach for HLS the contractor retains
significant latitude with less technical reviews than NASA has historically afforded and this approach
runs the risk of technical changes later in development. Finally, NASA is using a series of new
collaborative processes instead of a systems integrator or Artemis program manager as it has in
previous multi-component projects. Although these modified approaches have potential benefits of
decreasing costs and encouraging innovation, they correspondingly raise the possibility of schedule and
performance risks on NASA’s human-rated systems.
Only One Company Selected for HLS Demonstration
Mission Due to Reduced Funding
NASA’s HLS Program received significantly less funding from Congress than requested, presenting both
immediate and longer-term challenges. Specifically, NASA requested $3.4 billion to fund multiple HLS
demonstration awards to create a competitive environment intended to drive down costs, offer
redundancy, and promote innovation. However, the Agency only received about 25 percent of its
requested amount in FY 2021, ultimately allocating about $928 million for the HLS in its final FY 2021
operating plan.57 Under its initial appropriation request, the HLS Program proposed a heavily front-
loaded funding profile with awards to multiple contractors to demonstrate lunar landings of their HLS
vehicles on an ambitious timetable. Under this plan, one contractor would provide its HLS for a 2024
crewed landing while another would demonstrate its HLS design on a follow-on 2026 landing. The
FY 2021 appropriation led to NASA selecting a single HLS contractor—SpaceX—in April 2021 rather than
two as the Program preferred.
57 The Budget Operating Plan allocates NASA’s appropriation into the program line items with limited flexibility to reallocate
funding from one category to another.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 28
In response to awarding only one initial demonstration contract, NASA decided to accelerate the LETS
acquisition instead of continuing to procure single demonstration missions and also created additional
lunar lander research, development, and demonstration opportunities for industry. NASA developed a
Broad Agency Announcement open to all U.S. Industry for insight into sustaining requirements,
standards, and risk reduction efforts unique to the provider’s design. In September 2021, the HLS
Program awarded contracts to five companies to develop lander design concepts, evaluate their
technical capabilities, conduct critical component tests, and advance the maturity of key technologies,
thereby better positioning multiple contractors for future HLS service awards.
Further, the FY 2022 President’s Budget Request does not currently contain funds to support a second
HLS demonstration award—a scenario NASA expected would provide redundancy while creating a
competitive environment that would likely drive down costs.58 For both NASA’s Commercial Cargo and
Crew Transportation Programs, redundancy proved to be essential as both programs experienced failed
flights that were mitigated by having a second provider available to fly missions to the ISS.59
Additionally, each of the three companies in the initial HLS design phase offered different approaches—
including a range of in-flight refueling; crew station layouts; and ascent, descent, and transfer
elements—to tackle technical and operational challenges.
A lack of funding early in development not only delays the awarding of a contract to a second HLS
provider, it also raises the possibility of schedule delays if project managers have to defer the
development of critical technologies. Additionally, it is essential for the funding to be allocated
appropriately over the course of a program’s life cycle. Although NASA contends that it has sufficient
funding for SpaceX to conduct the single demonstration mission, several milestones had to be delayed
to compensate for its smaller funding profile. In accordance with best practices, a system life-cycle
model resembles a bell-shaped funding curve for research, development, testing, and evaluation with
more resources needed as development progresses and programmatic risks are identified and
remediated (see Figure 9).60 Space flight systems in particular must invest heavily in these activities
because once a system is launched into space it cannot be retrieved for maintenance.
58 In May 2021 the President submitted to Congress a funding request of $1.2 billion for the HLS for FY 2022. Despite not
requesting additional money to support a second HLS award, the Administration maintained in its new budget request that
NASA still plans to have multiple landing systems either prior to or after the planned 2024 lunar landing demonstration.
59 Failed flights for the commercial cargo and crew missions included: Orbital Sciences Orbital-3, a 2014 cargo mission that
exploded seconds after liftoff; SpaceX’s CRS-7, a 2015 cargo mission that disintegrated shortly after launch; and Boeing’s
Orbital Flight Test, a 2019 crew vehicle test that failed to enter its correct orbit and rendezvous with the ISS. More recently,
in August 2021, Boeing was unable to launch its second commercial crew flight test due to valve issues in its Starliner
propulsion system, delaying again any crewed flights.
60 GAO-20-195G.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 29
Figure 9: HLS Funding Profiles vs. Representative System Life-Cycle Cost Estimate
Source: NASA OIG presentation of Agency data and extrapolation of guidance from GAO-20-195G.
Note: The annual President’s Budget Request spans five fiscal years. For our analysis, we assumed a flat level of funding from
FY 2026 onward. In addition, the orange curve represents a single system profile even though the HLS Program intends to
fund the development of multiple systems.
Maintaining a late 2024 timetable to land astronauts on the Moon will mean SpaceX’s HLS Starship will
have less than 5 years for development and human-rated testing. As demonstrated in Figure 9, NASA’s
initial proposal for HLS funding (blue line) more closely resembles the shape of a typical development
bell curve (orange line), but receipt of substantially less money in FY 2021 (green line) resulted in a
significant flattening of that curve. This increases risks of schedule delays and long-term costs if the
underfunding continues early in development. Given that NASA received significantly less funding than
requested and the technical issues the Agency identified in its reviews of contractor design submissions,
HLS will take longer and cost more money than expected if not adequately funded in its current
development period.
Modified Fixed-Price Contract Will Reduce Cost Growth
and NASA’s Process to Mitigate Technical and Safety
Risks Is Being Implemented
NASA has traditionally used cost-plus contracts for space flight development but modified this approach
to use firm-fixed-price and FAR Part 35 contracts for HLS development to help manage costs. In the
past, the Agency relied on cost-plus contracts as requirements evolved and fixed-price contracts when it
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 30
could clearly define costs and risks.61 Firm-fixed-price contracts have the benefit of consistent, upfront
costs to a program, eliminating the potential for cost growth that has been typical with the Agency’s
cost-plus contracts.
While NASA’s use of firm-fixed-price contracts for HLS will help limit the excessive cost growth
experienced by the SLS and Orion Programs, the Agency’s approach for HLS has its own challenges. For
example, NASA’s use of a modified firm-fixed-price approach for HLS will likely reduce cost, but may also
exacerbate schedule, performance, and safety issues should the contractor be slow to meet certification
requirements. Much like the Commercial Cargo and Crew Programs in their initial stages, NASA’s
acquisition strategy includes companies developing the HLS to share development costs with the
Agency, a procedure that, coupled with a system of milestone payments, is designed to reduce costs.62
Towards this end, SpaceX has contributed much more than half of the required funding to date for the
HLS system and plans to continue this level of contribution.63 In addition, contractor flexibility in
meeting requirements provides the freedom to innovate; however, it also runs the risk of not meeting
NASA requirements, especially when it comes to human rating the spacecraft. To its credit, NASA added
specific design and construction standards to the demonstration contract with SpaceX to better ensure
compliance with requirements as well as a special clause that strengthens the Agency’s insight to ensure
certification of flight readiness. Nonetheless, in a 2019 report on the Commercial Crew Program we
noted a significant amount of verification work needed to achieve flight readiness, and thus the
challenge for NASA and SpaceX will be the timely processing of HLS documents and test results to verify
compliance with Agency standards.64
The Commercial Crew Program was ultimately successful in using a similar approach, but it took the
commercial partners 10 years to reach flight readiness, largely because of difficulties meeting human
rating requirements. Even if the first HLS flight occurred in 2028 as originally planned, that would still be
a faster development timeline than the Commercial Crew Program, which delivered astronauts to the
ISS in low Earth orbit rather than to the Moon, a distance nearly 200 times farther. However, we found
NASA’s process for conducting insight with commercial partners to mitigate technical and safety risks
throughout development is already well developed and is being implemented.65 Although NASA’s
Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel had expressed concerns in their 2020 annual report about the Agency’s
lack of oversight over key commercial partners in the HLS Program, recent AES interactions with the
Panel have noted the HLS Program’s progress in establishing its governance and integration model
61 Examples of NASA’s previous fixed-price contracts for space flight systems include the later developmental periods of the
Commercial Crew Program and the third generation of NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellites, which provide tracking,
data, voice, and video services to the spacecraft and to NASA’s space and science missions, other federal agencies, and
commercial users.
62 In the Commercial Crew Program, as the schedule slipped nearly 3 years milestone payments were also delayed, but the
overall fixed-price contract costs have not increased more than 5 percent. See NASA OIG, NASA’s Management of Crew
Transportation to the International Space Station (IG-20-005, November 14, 2019). Slippage in schedule also occurred
in the initial HLS design phase, but payment was not released until the milestone was achieved, thereby incurring no
additional cost.
63 SpaceX officials provided this characterization of the amount of its corporate funding—the exact number is withheld from
our report to protect future competitions.
64 IG-20-005.
65 Oversight is the process in which NASA approves and directly manages contractor activities while insight occurs when the
Agency monitors contractor activities but does not require specific approvals for most decisions. HEOMD published its
Crewed Deep Space Systems Human Rating Certification Requirements and Standards for NASA Missions document in
March 2021. In turn, the HLS Program cross-walked the program requirements with the HEOMD guidance and published its
own set of required guidance for certification.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 31
which is key in providing oversight.66 Moreover, NASA’s Chief Engineer noted the progress made in both
establishing safety standards and governance. Finally, while we observed that the Commercial Crew and
Cargo Programs have personnel on-site at SpaceX’s facilities and the HLS Program does not, officials plan
to institute resident offices at SpaceX locations once the Blue Origin litigation is concluded. NASA
officials have told us personnel resident at contractor sites help ensure effective communication among
all parties.
Project Management Approach for the Human Landing
System Modeled After Commercial Crew Program
To meet the aggressive goal of a crewed lunar landing in 2024, the HLS Program adopted a tailored
project management approach that is modeled, in part, after the Commercial Crew Program.
Specifically, instead of using the Agency’s standardized series of technical milestones for major
acquisitions, HLS is leveraging an approach that relies on reduced reviews and data submissions to
encourage innovation and reduce costs. For example, HLS held two design reviews—a Certification
Baseline Review and Continuation Review—for the three companies that received a contract for the
initial HLS design work. Both of these reviews took the place of the typical series of design reviews
required in the Formulation phase of an acquisition, meeting the intent of standard review
requirements.67 After completing this initial design work, the Program plans to follow its standardized
project management approach where an Agency Baseline Cost and Schedule commitment will be made
following its next milestone—KDP-C.68 Contractually negotiated design reviews for SpaceX, such as the
Critical Design Review, will follow for the SpaceX HLS Starship.69 Programmatically, after KDP-C, the
Program will deviate again from the typical program milestones and use annual reviews (called
synchronization reviews) throughout development and testing, ending with the HLS’s landing on the
lunar surface.
The Commercial Crew Program awarded multiple early development contracts during a 4-year period
before holding the Certification Baseline Review to provide time to develop more mature designs.
While HLS Program officials told us they are leveraging lessons learned from the Commercial Crew
Program, HLS had only 4 months from the start of the contract before they held the Certification
Baseline Review. NASA officials told us that the HLS team successfully worked with all three contractors
during the initial design work, which helped determine design and construction standards and resulted
in agreements on how to build the landers prior to finalization of the demonstration mission contract.
Nonetheless, since all three HLS submissions had immature technologies, NASA could have benefitted
from additional time to mature the designs and key technologies prior to holding both reviews, much
like with the Commercial Crew Program.
66 The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel evaluates NASA’s safety performance and advises the Agency on ways to improve that
performance.
67 In Formulation, a typical NASA acquisition will have a Systems Readiness Review, Systems Design Review, and Preliminary
Design Review. Rather than doing those reviews, the HLS Program opted for a Certification Baseline Review intended to
finalize functional and performance requirements, and a Continuation Review intended to evaluate the design’s readiness for
a potential award for demonstration and to be equivalent to a less stringent version of a Preliminary Design Review.
68 KDPs are the events where the decision authority determines the readiness of a program or project to continue to the next
phase of the life cycle. Specifically, KDP-C allows the HLS to progress to final design and fabrication.
69 The Critical Design Review demonstrates that the maturity of the design is appropriate to support proceeding with full-scale
fabrication, assembly, integration, and testing.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 32
Moving forward, NASA is taking on additional risk if the new annual synchronization reviews do not
meet the intent of milestones KDP-D and -E, the Systems Integration Review, and the Operational
Readiness Review that take place before spacecraft flight in order to address technical and engineering
risks.70 Milestone reviews are important opportunities for a program to assess and mitigate risks
throughout development, such as ensuring that key technologies and subsystems are maturing and
safety requirements are met. Without holding those reviews or ensuring the substance of those reviews
are captured in the annual synchronization reviews, NASA may lack appropriate insight into HLS
development.
For its part, NASA officials told us that in addition to insight teams looking into the HLS’s development,
they stood up “collaboration teams” during the initial design contracts to serve as a NASA resource to
the contractors and assist with solving problems. Initially, the HLS Program dedicated about 50 NASA
employees to work with each contractor, with plans to increase that number for the follow-on
development contract.
NASA Managing Artemis Activities Using Newly
Established Processes Rather Than a Systems Integrator
or Program Manager
NASA has developed a multi-faceted management structure to facilitate systems integration among the
multiple Artemis programs and projects. In addition, GAO’s Standards for Internal Control notes that
management should establish an organizational structure, assign responsibility, and delegate authority
to achieve the entity’s objectives.71 Table 3 provides a description of the membership, status, and
responsibilities of the recently created collaboration entities.
70 Annual synchronization reviews are tailored reviews where the contractor provides data similar to KDPs including a review of
configuration, maturity, and integrated analyses, as well as Standing Review Board Independent Assessments. KDP-D is the
milestone event that allows a project to proceed to Assembly, Integration and Test, and Launch and KDP-E moves the project
into Operations and Sustainment. A Systems Integration Review ensures segments, components, and subsystems are on
schedule to be integrated into the system. The Operational Readiness Review ensures that all system and support (flight and
ground) hardware, software, personnel, procedures, and user documentation accurately reflect the deployed state of the
system.
71 GAO’s Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government (GAO-14-704G, September 10, 2014) sets the standards for
an effective internal control system for federal agencies and provides the overall framework for designing, implementing,
and operating that system. The standards note that having a control environment that has discipline and structure helps
define objectives and how control activities are structured.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 33
Table 3: Summaries of Newly Instituted Artemis Coordination, Collaboration, and Board Processes
Collaboration
Process Membership Status Responsibilities
Federated Board
HEOMD, Science, and Space
Technology Mission Directorates,
and Program Offices
Implemented: Yes
Codified: No
• Established by the prior NASA Administrator to
address cross-directorate issues represented
by divisions within HEOMD and the Science
and Space Technology Mission Directorates
• Only for discussions, not a decision board
Expanded
Federated Board
HEOMD, Science, and Space
Technology Mission Directorates,
and Program Offices; General
Counsel; Mission Support; and
Office of International and
Interagency Relations
Implemented: Yes
Codified: No
Larger version of the Federated Board that
includes other support and groups
Joint Directorate
Program
Management
Council
As needed: HEOMD, Science, and
Space Technology Mission
Directorates, and Program Offices
Implemented: Yes
Codified: No
Decision making authority for Artemis programs
and projects across all NASA directorates
HEOMD Systems
Engineering and
Integration
Function
Office is a delegated function of
the HEOMD Associate
Administrator across all HEOMD
divisions
Implemented: Yes
Codified: Yes
• Responsible for providing overall strategic
guidance and input on system requirements
• Lead overall Artemis architecture and has key
role in formulation mission planning
• Integrate science and technology goals from
mission directorates and international partners
for Artemis missions, and the strategy to
prepare for future human missions to Mars
Joint AES-ESD
Control Board
Co-Chairs: AES and ESD Deputy
Associate Administrators and
supporting staff, Artemis-related
Program and Project Managers
HEOMD SE&I: Ad-hoc member
Implemented: Yes
Codified: Charter
approved; awaiting
signature
• Disposition program changes jointly affecting
AES/ESD that exceed individual or multiple
program cost and schedule authority, including
joint AES/ESD controlled schedule and
milestone changes
• Review and approve joint AES/ESD mission
content, priorities, and integrated scope
through flight readiness certifications to
ensure AES and ESD programs and personnel
are ready to support the mission
AES Control Board
AES Deputy Associate
Administrator and supporting
staff, AES Managers, and Artemis
Program Offices; Ad Hoc members
from ESD, other directorates, and
programs involved in Artemis
crewed missions
Implemented: Yes
Codified: Charter
approved; awaiting
signature
• Establish and manifest Artemis III and
subsequent missions’ launch and landing
services, logistics and payload manifests, flight
objectives, and priorities
• Establish and manage the AES Division
technical and programmatic baseline (budget,
schedule, technical, mission definition, and
risks)
• Disposition and approval for elevation for
recommended changes, exceptions,
deviations, or waivers
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 34
Collaboration
Process Membership Status Responsibilities
Joint Program
(Integration)
Control Boards at
various levels
AES and ESD programs and
projects conducting integration
activities;
HEOMD SE&I: Ad-hoc attendance
Implemented: Yes
Codified: Draft
waiting approval
Joint Program (Integration) Control Board
charters and individual programs and projects
Source: NASA OIG presentation of Agency data.
Unlike the first crewed missions to the lunar surface under the Apollo Program, NASA has no overall
NASA program manager overseeing the Artemis missions or a main contractor, as in the Space Shuttle
Program, serving as a lead systems integrator.72 Instead, the Agency is giving as much flexibility as
possible to the individual programs supporting Artemis while encouraging cross-program, directorate,
and international partner communication through a range of collaboration processes, including those
identified in Table 3. NASA has taken several steps to formalize this coordination: delegated Artemis
planning for the lunar landing missions to AES, codified the integration approach, stood up and staffed
the SE&I function, and developed charters for new joint control and integration boards at multiple
levels. Further, NASA intends to use its existing Agency governance (Agency Program Management
Council and Directorate Program Management Council), along with convening the Joint Directorate
Program Management Council, for Artemis implementation and decision making. Even so, neither the
Federated Boards nor the Joint Directorate Program Management Council are codified yet in Agency
policy. As a result, these processes may not be smoothly executed, especially if leadership, program
priorities, or key members of the workforce change. This is essential because the requirements and
designs of one system affect the programs and projects across multiple directorates.
72 Lead system integrators are prime contractors hired to manage large and complex programs within a given budget and
schedule.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 35
CONCLUSION
NASA’s goal to land astronauts on the Moon’s South Pole in late 2024 faces multiple significant
challenges including major technical risks, an unrealistic development schedule, and lower-than-
requested funding levels. As a result, the 2024 date will likely slip to 2026 at the earliest. On top of an
overly optimistic development schedule, the HLS bid protests to GAO delayed the HLS Program’s
schedule by 6 months with an additional 3-month delay due to Blue Origin's follow-up lawsuit at the
U.S. Court of Federal Claims. Moreover, delays in developing the Gateway will likely preclude the lunar
outpost’s availability to provide communications and supplies for both the Orion and HLS during NASA’s
early Moon landing missions.
Given that NASA is likely to spend $93 billion on the Artemis program through FY 2025, and in light of
the $4.1 billion cost-per-launch for at least its first four Artemis missions, it is important that the Agency
not only identify ways to reduce costs but also take steps consistent with best practices to make current
cost estimates more reliable and transparent. The Agency has acknowledged the high costs of its lunar
and Mars goals and is examining ways to make the missions sustainable by transitioning some programs
to fixed-price contracts. With the emerging capabilities provided by commercial partners, the Agency
may have future options that can help control costs to meet its exploration goals. While NASA has made
strides in ensuring communication and integration between the Artemis programs—such as establishing
a HEOMD SE&I, Federated Boards, Joint Directorate Program Management Council, and Joint Program
Boards—these nascent procedures remain at risk to unfamiliarity and changes in organization,
leadership, or program priorities.
Whether acquiring space flight systems for Artemis or eventually for crewed missions to Mars, NASA
must determine its procurement and programmatic strategies to best support its objectives. This
includes encouraging competition, using appropriate instruments—various FAR-based contracts or
Space Act Agreements—and employing appropriate insight and oversight mechanisms to ensure NASA
receives systems that meet its needs. Importantly, as we pointed out in our first Artemis report,
understanding the state of technology development and level of maturity of requirements for each
Artemis system will help inform decision makers on the best approach and produce realistic schedule
and cost estimates.
73
73 IG-21-004.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 36
RECOMMENDATIONS, MANAGEMENT’S RESPONSE,
AND OUR EVALUATION
To increase accuracy, transparency, and safety of human space flight, we recommended NASA’s
Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate:
1. Develop a realistic, risk-informed schedule that includes sufficient margin to better align Agency
expectations with the development schedule.
2. Expand upon the existing draft Artemis IMS to include Artemis programs outside AES and ESD to
properly align dependencies across directorates.
3. Develop an Artemis-wide cost estimate, in accordance with best practices, that is updated on an
annual basis.
4. Maintain an accounting of per-mission costs to increase transparency and establish a
benchmark against which NASA can assess the outcome of initiatives to increase the
affordability of ESD systems.
5. Definitize outstanding Artemis-related contracts within 180 days in accordance with NASA FAR
Supplement 1843.7005(a), Definitization (2018).
6. Develop a realistic funding profile and schedule given the underfunding of HLS in FY 2021, the
selection of one HLS award, and the desire to compete a sustainability contract for future lunar
missions.
7. Identify measurable cost reduction targets for its ESD contractors.
In addition, we recommended NASA’s Chief Engineer in coordination with the HLS Program Manager:
8. Validate that the annual synchronization reviews meet the intent and expectations of the
milestone reviews replaced by the tailored acquisition approach.
We also recommended that the NASA Deputy Administrator in coordination with Mission Directorate
Associate Administrators:
9. Codify the remaining governance structure such as the Federated Boards and Joint Directorate
Program Management Council.
We provided a draft of this report to NASA management who concurred with Recommendations 1, 5, 6,
7, and 8; partially concurred with Recommendations 2 and 9; and non-concurred with
Recommendations 3 and 4. We consider management’s comments responsive to Recommendations 1,
5, 6, 7, and 8 and therefore those recommendations are resolved and will be closed upon completion
and verification of the proposed corrective actions. However, we found the Agency’s response to
Recommendations 2, 3, 4, and 9 unresponsive. Consequently, those recommendations will remain
unresolved pending further discussions with the Agency.
NASA partially concurred with Recommendation 2 to include Artemis activities across the various
directorates as part of its IMS. During the course of our audit, NASA developed a schedule that includes
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 37
PAUL
MARTIN
Digitally signed by PAUL
MARTIN
Date: 2021.11.15
09:17:42 -05'00'
both AES and ESD activities, but still lacks other important lunar activities such as the CLPS missions
which intends to fly missions biannually to the Moon. While NASA tells us the Artemis missions are
not dependent on these other activities, deconfliction of time, space, and resources is still needed as
is integration of the essential information provided by these science investigations and technology
demonstrations.
NASA also partially concurred with Recommendation 9 to codify its remaining governance structures.
NASA agreed with codifying the Joint Directorate Program Management Council, a key decision-making
and review authority for the Artemis missions. However, the Agency did not agree to codify the
Federated Board because it is a coordination entity and does not make decisions. We learned late in
this audit that NASA was in the process of reviewing the necessity of maintaining this Board. To the
extent the Agency retains the Federated Board, we believe a charter is needed because such a senior-
level board can wield significant influence even if it does not have official decision-making authority.
Additionally, NASA non-concurred with Recommendations 3 and 4 that address the need to track the
overall cost of the Artemis program and each individual Artemis mission. For Recommendation 3, the
Agency states that Artemis-wide cost tracking is not required according to its policy and as such Agency
officials are following best practices in providing cost estimates and commitments for Agency-approved
programs and projects. Likewise, in response to Recommendation 4—tracking costs by mission—NASA
maintains it should not account for costs on a per-mission basis because doing so would reduce
contractual transparency to key stakeholders. While we appreciate the importance of tracking metrics
aimed at managing individual contracts within specific projects, failure to track the overall cost of the
Artemis program and each individual mission reduces insight into the actual costs of the Artemis
program and, in turn, makes it difficult to assess the Agency’s progress in reducing costs.
Management’s comments are reproduced in Appendix E. Technical comments provided by
management have been incorporated as appropriate.
Major contributors to this report include Ridge Bowman, Space Operations Director; Kevin Fagedes,
Project Manager; Scott Bruckner; Kelsey Dalton; Wayne Emberton; Tyler Martin; Daniel Mills;
Lauren Suls; Earl Baker; and Shani Dennis.
If you have questions or wish to comment on the quality or usefulness of this report, contact
Laurence Hawkins, Audit Operations and Quality Assurance Director, at 202-358-1543 or
laurence.b.hawkins@nasa.gov.
Paul K. Martin
Inspector General
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 38
Appendix A
APPENDIX A: SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY
We performed this audit from December 2020 through November 2021 in accordance with generally
accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit
to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
In this report, we assessed the Artemis program’s schedule and projected costs, and how the Agency’s
acquisition and programmatic approaches facilitate its plans to land astronauts on the Moon. Our
review included interviews with officials at NASA Headquarters, Johnson Space Center, Kennedy Space
Center, Marshall Space Center, and SpaceX. We conducted a site visit at SpaceX’s headquarters in
Hawthorne, California, and their Starbase in Boca Chica, Texas.
To assess the Artemis program’s schedule and projected costs, we used a combination of document
reviews, interviews, and numerous discussions with NASA officials and selected contractors. In addition,
we visited SpaceX facilities in California and Texas to observe HLS development firsthand. Our schedule
analysis included examining ESD manifests, integrated master schedules, schedule risk analyses, and
program quarterly reviews. As for projected costs, we examined program budget submissions,
presidential budget requests, appropriations, quarterly program data sheets, and operating plans. We
also reviewed the 2020 Artemis Phase 1 Funding Requirements in NASA’s Lunar Exploration Program
Overview—Appendix 5, and the following prime contracts: SLS stages, boosters, RS-25, and upper stage;
Orion; and Gateway’s HALO and PPE. In addition, for actual expenditures, we used NASA’s financial
system, our data analytics team, and program feedback to determine and analyze NASA’s obligations.
For both schedule and costs, we compared current information against baseline commitments. We then
followed up with program officials—both NASA and SpaceX—to confirm our analysis and the
information we found. Our interviews on cost and schedule included officials from HEOMD, AES, ESD,
and SpaceX, as well as multiple discussions with program and budget analysts to determine which Work
Breakdown Structure codes—the accounting method used to count costs—were properly accounted for
as Artemis costs.
To determine how the Agency’s acquisition and programmatic approaches facilitate its plans to land
astronauts on the Moon, we reviewed the September 2020 Artemis Plan, architecture briefings, and
detailed Artemis project acquisition strategy documents that describe the different methods for how
astronauts will travel to the lunar surface. We examined each of the three initial design contracts for
the three HLS contractors (SpaceX, Blue Origin, and Dynetics), all contract modifications, and the source
selection statements associated with the various contracts. Additionally, we reviewed the acquisition
strategy and approved tailored programmatic approach as outlined in the HLS Acquisition Strategy
Meeting and quarterly program briefings. We reviewed federal and NASA policies and procedures for
types of contracts and program and project management requirements. We also reviewed documents
from the HLS Continuation Review for SpaceX, which outlined the status of technical challenges,
technology development, and the operational approach for SpaceX’s HLS. Further, we conducted
interviews with officials from HEOMD, HEOMD SE&I, ESD, Office of the Chief Engineer, the HLS Program
Manager, HLS Contracting Officer, and the Launch Services Program, as well as SpaceX.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 39
Appendix A
Assessment of Data Reliability
We relied upon computer-generated data as part of performing this audit. We reviewed and analyzed
NASA obligation and funding data for FYs 2012 through 2021 in NASA’s financial accounting system and
used program budget estimates for FYs 2022 through 2025. The obligation and funding data were
mainly derived from Artemis mission costs: Exploration Systems Development, Advanced Exploration
Systems, Exploration Research and Development, Science, Space Technology, and Mission Support. We
assessed the reliability of the financial data by (1) verifying the data with the NASA OIG’s Advanced Data
Analytics Program and Artemis Dashboard Tracker, (2) reviewing data provided by NASA’s directorates
and divisions, and (3) interviewing Agency officials knowledgeable about this data. We determined that
the data was sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report.
Review of Internal Controls
We assessed internal controls and compliance with laws and regulations necessary to satisfy the audit
objectives. Specifically, we assessed the Artemis program’s schedule and projected costs, and how the
Agency’s acquisition and programmatic approaches facilitate its plans to land astronauts on the Moon,
which are identified and discussed previously in this report. However, because our review was limited
to these internal control elements and underlying principles, it may not have disclosed all internal
control deficiencies that may have existed at the time of this audit. Our recommendations, if
implemented, will correct the identified control weaknesses.
Prior Coverage
During the last 5 years, the NASA Office of Inspector General and GAO have issued 21 reports of
significant relevance to the subject of this report. Unrestricted reports can be accessed at
https://oig.nasa.gov/audits/auditReports.html and https://www.gao.gov, respectively.
NASA Office of Inspector General
NASA's Development of Next-Generation Spacesuits (IG-21-025, August 10, 2021)
Artemis Status Update (IG-21-018, April 19, 2021)
NASA’s Efforts to Mitigate the Risks Posed by Orbital Debris (IG-21-011, January 27, 2021)
NASA’s Challenges to Safely Return Humans to the Moon by 2024 (IG-21-007, December 1, 2020)
NASA's Management of the Gateway Program for Artemis Missions (IG-21-004, November 10, 2020)
NASA's Management of Its Acquisition Workforce (IG-21-002, October 27, 2020)
NASA’s Management of the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle Program (IG-20-018, July 16, 2020)
NASA's Development of Ground and Flight Application Software for the Artemis Program (IG-20-014,
March 19, 2020)
Audit of NASA's Development of Its Mobile Launchers (IG-20-013, March 17, 2020)
NASA's Management of Space Launch System Program Costs and Contracts (IG-20-012, March 10, 2020)
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 40
Appendix A
NASA’s Management of Crew Transportation to the International Space Station (IG-20-005,
November 14, 2019)
2019 Report on NASA's Top Management and Performance Challenges (November 13, 2019)
NASA's Management of the Space Launch System Stages Contract (IG-19-001, October 10, 2018)
NASA’s Plans for Human Exploration Beyond Low Earth Orbit (IG-17-017, April 13, 2017)
Government Accountability Office
NASA Lunar Programs: Significant Work Remains, Underscoring Challenges to Achieving Moon Landing
in 2024 (GAO-21-330, May 26, 2021)
NASA: Assessments of Major Projects (GAO-21-306, May 20, 2021)
NASA Human Space Exploration: Significant Investments in Future Capabilities Require Strengthened
Management Oversight (GAO-21-105, December 15, 2020)
NASA: Assessments of Major Projects (GAO-20-405, April 29, 2020)
NASA Lunar Programs: Opportunities Exist to Strengthen Analyses and Plans for Moon Landing
(GAO-20-68, December 19, 2019)
NASA Human Space Exploration: Persistent Delays and Cost Growth Reinforce Concerns over
Management of Programs (GAO-19-377, June 19, 2019)
High-Risk Series: Substantial Efforts Needed to Achieve Greater Progress on High-Risk Areas
(GAO-19-157SP, March 6, 2019)
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 41
Appendix B
APPENDIX B: HLS PROGRAM’S TAILORED
PROJECT MANAGEMENT APPROACH
NASA is utilizing a tailored approach for the HLS Program to streamline typical program management
processes similar to the Gateway Program. NASA policy for program and project management dictates
certain requirements for oversight, life-cycle reviews, and other programmatic matters, while also
providing the flexibility to adjust those requirements to fit the unique needs of a program or project.
NASA has tailored requirements for several other programs, including the SLS, Orion, and Commercial
Crew Programs. The HLS Program will undergo extensive tailoring—modeled after the Commercial Crew
Program—that it believes will result in significant cost and schedule savings without sacrificing technical
and programmatic insight (see Figure 10).
Figure 10: HLS Program Tailoring Compared to NASA Standard
Source: NASA OIG presentation of Agency data.
Note: Acquisition Strategy Meeting (ASM), Formulation Authorization Document (FAD), Preliminary Design Review (PDR),
Key Decision Point (KDP), Critical Design Review (CDR), Systems Integration Review (SIR), Program Integration Review (PIR),
Authority to Proceed (ATP), Certification Baseline Review (CBR), Continuation Review (CR), Annual Synchronization Review
(ASR).
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 42
Appendix B
The tailoring approach will impact Program-level design reviews and KDPs, important governing
documents, and programmatic analyses like an Agency Baseline Commitment (ABC) and Joint Cost and
Schedule Confidence Level (JCL).
74 NASA policy outlines various design reviews at the program level
(e.g., System Definition Review, Critical Design Review, System Integration Review), which are typically
followed by KDP-A, -B, -C, and -D. The HLS Program is tailoring these requirements and will instead
negotiate design reviews with the contractor to facilitate efficiency and align with industry best
practices. These reviews will include evaluations by independent technical and programmatic
authorities. In lieu of four KDPs, the Program will hold a KDP-C about 8 months after contract award,
with annual synchronization reviews thereafter. This is in addition to an Acquisition Strategy Council
meeting in May 2019 that served the purpose of a KDP-A.
NASA policy also requires programs to submit guiding documents like the Formulation Authorization
Document and Program Plan to authorize transition to the following life-cycle stage and establish
important programmatic baselines. The HLS Program captured content similar to the Formulation
Authorization Document in meeting minutes from the May 2019 Acquisition Strategy Council meeting,
while a final Program Plan is not expected until KDP-C is completed.
For cost and schedule analysis requirements, single-project programs like HLS are required to submit an
ABC and JCL at KDP-C. The HLS Program intends to submit an ABC that captures costs up to the initial
lunar landing demonstration, as opposed to the full life cycle of the Program. With regard to the JCL,
the Program will create a “lean” JCL or Schedule Risk Analysis using a milestone summary schedule,
which the Program believes will provide the flexibility to both inform the ABC and provide regular and
timely schedule risk updates. The contractor partner will also provide the Basis of Estimates to allow for
continuing NASA insight into cost and schedule. The former NASA Associate Administrator approved
these tailored requirements on June 24, 2019.
74 An ABC establishes and documents an integrated set of project requirements, cost, schedule, technical content, and an
agreed to JCL that forms the basis for NASA’s commitment to the Office of Management and Budget and Congress. A JCL
analysis is used to inform management of the likelihood of a project’s programmatic success, establish cost and schedule
baselines, determine the probability that cost will be equal to or less than the targeted cost, and schedule will be equal to or
less than the targeted schedule date.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 43
Appendix C
APPENDIX C: ARTEMIS SYSTEM DESCRIPTIONS
To achieve its Artemis ambitions, NASA requires multiple space flight systems to both explore the Moon
prior to the astronauts’ arrival and deliver the astronauts to the lunar surface. The space flight systems
that will be used for Artemis I through III are explored further in this appendix including the SLS, Orion,
EGS, Gateway, and HLS. In addition, we describe spacesuits, the Volatiles Investigating Polar Exploration
Rover (VIPER), and an example of a landing system for science investigations—the Masten Lunar Lander.
Prior costs described in the systems updates are identified as obligated funds. Each system is also at
various levels of development with its progress tracked according to its Technology Readiness Level
(TRL), which begins at 1 and ends at 9. Figure 11 shows how the TRL number increases based upon the
level of progress or milestone achieved.
Figure 11: Technology Readiness Levels
Source: NASA OIG presentation of Agency data.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 44
Appendix C
Space Launch System
NASA’s SLS is a two-stage, heavy-lift rocket that will launch the Orion capsule into space.a To fulfill
America’s future needs for deep space missions, the SLS will evolve into increasingly more powerful
configurations. For the first three Artemis missions, NASA will use the Block 1 configuration. By
Artemis IV, NASA will be using the Block 1B configuration with eventual evolution to the Block 2
configuration by the ninth Artemis mission, each of those with increased lift capability.
In 2011 and 2012, NASA contracted with three commercial companies to develop the SLS’s major
elements—Boeing (for the launch system’s Core Stage and Upper Stage, known as the Interim Cryogenic
Propulsion Stage), Aerojet Rocketdyne (Aerojet) (for RS-25 and RL-10 engines adapted to SLS
requirements), and Northrop Grumman (for solid rocket boosters to help power the SLS). SLS has
experienced cost growth of 43 percent for the Artemis I mission and 3 years of schedule delays from the
initial target of November 2018 to November 2021.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 45
Appendix C
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 46
Appendix C
Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle
Orion will serve as the exploration vehicle that will transport astronauts beyond low Earth orbit, sustain
the crew during space travel, and provide safe reentry from deep space return velocities. The Orion
vehicle—built by prime contractor Lockheed Martin—has four major components, including a Launch
Abort System; Crew Module; Service Module, composed of the NASA Crew Module Adapter and
European Service Module; and Spacecraft Adapter. Originally conceptualized in 2005 under the now
defunct Constellation Program, Orion has evolved to meet the needs of NASA’s Moon and Mars
missions. On December 5, 2014, the Orion first flew in space on a Delta IV rocket during the Exploration
Flight Test–1; however, the test article did not include a functional service module or demonstrate an
abort capability. The next flight planned is Artemis I, the first launch of the combined SLS/Orion system.
This 22- to 25-day uncrewed mission, which was planned for November 2021, is over 3 years later than
initially scheduled. Despite the slippage, Orion is proceeding with the production of crew capsules for
later Artemis missions before the first mission is completed.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 47
Appendix C
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 48
Appendix C
Exploration Ground Systems
The EGS Program is developing, modernizing, and upgrading the ground systems, software, and launch
site infrastructure, and preparing the operations team to assemble, test, and launch the SLS and Orion
Flight Systems and recover the Orion Crew Module. EGS is supporting the transformation of Kennedy
from a historically government-only launch complex to a spaceport that can handle several different
kinds of spacecraft and rockets—both government and commercial. The ground systems include the
Launch Control Center, Vehicle Assembly Building, Mobile Launcher, Crawler-Transporter, and Launch
Pad 39B, all of which are needed for the uncrewed Artemis I mission. In addition, a second Mobile
Launcher is being built to accommodate the larger SLS Block 1B rocket.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 49
Appendix C
Gateway
The Gateway is a lunar orbiting outpost that will function as a small space station and support NASA’s
deep space exploration plans. The Gateway will not only act as a waystation for astronauts prior to
embarking on missions to the lunar surface and beyond but will also provide opportunities for further
scientific research and technology demonstration. While several elements are expected to be part of
the Gateway once it is complete, the first two elements—the Power and Propulsion Element (PPE) and
Habitation and Logistics Outpost (HALO)—will provide initial capabilities with the goal to support initial
lunar landings.a
In May 2019, NASA awarded a contract to Maxar Technologies (Maxar) to develop and build the PPE,
which will provide 60-kilowatt power generation, solar electrical and chemical propulsion, and
communications capabilities as the foundation of the Gateway. Following that, NASA awarded a
contract to Northrop Grumman in July 2019 to design the HALO, which will provide the Gateway with
initial living and working space and additional life support systems. Though originally planned to be
launched separately, NASA announced in February 2020 that the PPE and HALO will be integrated and
launched together in a co-manifested payload through a commercial launch service provider in
November 2023. In February 2021, the Agency announced that the co-manifested PPE and HALO would
be launched on SpaceX’s Falcon Heavy rocket no earlier than May 2024, though funding shortages have
delayed the launch until November 2024.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 50
Appendix C
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 51
Appendix C
Human Landing System
NASA’s HLS will be used to ferry astronauts from either the Orion or Gateway to the Moon’s surface.
In April 2021, NASA selected SpaceX for a contract to demonstrate its HLS Starship on a crewed lunar
mission in 2024. After NASA’s selection announcement, the two other HLS competitors that submitted
proposals—Blue Origin and Dynetics—filed bid protests on that decision, which GAO denied on
July 30, 2021, allowing NASA to continue executing its contract with SpaceX. All three competitors
received initial design contracts, completing a Certification Baseline Review and Continuation Review
evaluating the progress on each of those designs. Moving forward, SpaceX is planning to conduct a
series of test flights in anticipation of the HLS demonstration mission, including an orbital test flight,
in-space refueling test, and uncrewed landing of the HLS on the lunar surface. With SpaceX’s proposal,
a fuel depot will fly to low Earth orbit prior to the HLS launch where it will be filled with propellant from
multiple tanker vehicles. After the HLS launches, it will then receive propellant from the depot before
continuing its journey to the lunar Near Rectilinear Halo Orbit where it will receive the crew.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 52
Appendix C
Spacesuits
NASA has been developing Extravehicular Activity (EVA) technologies for space exploration missions
since 2007, and originally planned to design, manufacture, and certify the Artemis III suits in-house.
This included Exploration Extravehicular Mobility Unit (xEMU) spacesuits planned to be worn by
astronauts for visits to the lunar surface during Artemis missions. The xEMU suits were designed to
provide astronauts with critical life support and communications capabilities and protect them from the
harsh lunar environment. These suits, along with Vehicle Interface and Flight Support Equipment and
additional tools, comprised the three development areas of the Exploration Extravehicular Activity
(xEVA) project within the Gateway Program. However, in April 2021, the Agency altered their
acquisition approach for the suits, opting to instead utilize a commercial services approach to acquire
EVA services for the ISS, Artemis, and other advanced programs. Similar to the commercial crew and
cargo efforts, the approach will involve NASA paying for contractor-developed suits as opposed to
building the suits in-house or purchasing the suits outright.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 53
Appendix C
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 54
Appendix C
Volatiles Investigating Polar Exploration Rover
NASA’s VIPER will explore the extreme Moon environment in search of water ice and other potential
resources. This mobile robot (or rover) is scheduled to land at the lunar South Pole region in late 2023
on an approximately 100-day mission to provide critical information on the origin and distribution of
water on the Moon and will steer future approaches to harvesting in-situ resources for future human
space exploration. Ames Research Center is the lead Center for VIPER, leading project management,
science, systems engineering, rover flight software, and real-time rover surface operations. Johnson
Space Center is responsible for the design of the rover hardware, while Ames Research Center, Kennedy,
and commercial partner Honeybee Robotics provide the four VIPER instruments. NASA awarded a
contract under Commercial Lunar Payload Services (CLPS) to Astrobotic Technology (Astrobotic) to
deliver VIPER to the lunar surface. Subsequently, Astrobotic awarded a contract to SpaceX to provide
the launch service.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 55
Appendix C
Masten Space Systems Commercial Lunar Payload Services
Task Order
A key part of NASA’s Artemis lunar exploration, CLPS facilitates an innovative, service-based,
competitive acquisition approach that enables rapid, affordable, and frequent access to the lunar
surface via a growing market of American commercial providers. By 2019, NASA had contracts with
14 companies that were eligible to bid on specific task orders for the delivery of science instruments and
technology demonstrations. The NASA CLPS initiative plans for two lunar delivery task orders each year,
and it selected Masten Space Systems for delivery of nine separately procured instruments, including
MoonRanger—a small robotic rover that weighs less than 30 pounds—using Masten’s XL-1 Lander to
deliver to the Moon’s South Pole in 2023. The lunar deliveries result from firm-fixed-price task orders
competitively awarded under indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity contracts with a potential
maximum value of $2.6 billion over a period of 10 years. NASA intends to continue issuing competitive
task order solicitations for future payload deliveries from among the catalog of 14 CLPS vendors.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 56
Appendix D
APPENDIX D: ARTEMIS CONTRACTS
The commercial partners supporting Artemis are integral to the success of the mission. Below is
information on major contracts by Artemis element as of August 2021. Table 4 provides a summary,
including scope of work, required deliverables, performance period, contract type, contract value, and
obligated amount.
Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle. The contractor responsible for building the Orion capsule is
Lockheed Martin. The base contract, awarded in August 2006 under the now-defunct Constellation
Program, was originally worth $3.9 billion. As of August 2021, the contract value had grown to
$13.8 billion. NASA also awarded Lockheed Martin the follow-on production contract using a
justification for other than full and open competition. The Orion Production and Operations Contract is
currently worth $2.7 billion. Together these two contracts accounted for up to 77 percent of Orion’s
obligated funding for FY 2021.
Space Launch System. The value of the six major SLS element contracts is $20.4 billion. Boeing has
the Stages contract and is currently negotiating the follow-on Stages Production and Evolution Contract,
which was awarded sole source. Boeing is also working with United Launch Alliance on the Interim
Cryogenic Upper Stage contract. Northrop Grumman is providing the SLS’s Solid Rocket Boosters.
Aerojet is providing the RS-25 engines under two separate contracts—one for the adaptation of Shuttle-
era engines (RS-25 Adaptation) and another for production of new RS-25 engines (RS-25 Restart). In
FY 2021, these six contracts accounted for $1.7 billion of obligated funding, or 70 percent of the total
SLS Program obligations.75
Exploration Ground Systems. The contractor selected to design and build the second Mobile Launcher,
which will support more powerful iterations of the SLS, is Bechtel. The cost-plus-award-fee, end-item
contract is valued at $411 million. We previously reported on NASA incorporating lessons learned from
the Mobile Launcher 1 development project into the contract for Mobile Launcher 2.76 One of those
lessons was utilizing a single contract to both design and build the Mobile Launcher in order to remedy
communication and integration issues that occurred with the first Mobile Launcher project. As of
August 2021, this contract accounted for 13 percent of EGS’s obligated funding for FY 2021.
Human Landing System. The total base period contract value awarded to Blue Origin, Dynetics, and
SpaceX—the three contractors originally selected to compete for the HLS demonstration—was
$859 million, with 100 percent of that value obligated to date. With the selection of SpaceX to further
develop and demonstrate its lunar lander, SpaceX’s total HLS contract value increased significantly—
from $139.6 million in the base period to $3 billion.
Gateway. Contracts for the first two major elements of the Gateway—PPE and HALO—were awarded in
2019 and have a combined value of $1.6 billion. These two elements comprise 45 percent of total
funding spent in FY 2021 on all Gateway contracts. The $7 billion Gateway logistics services award
includes multiple missions to and from the Gateway over a 15-year period and is available to other
75 To learn more about the NASA OIG’s audit work of the SLS Program contracts, see IG-20-012.
76 IG-20-013.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 57
Appendix D
commercial providers once selected. Currently SpaceX is the only provider selected and has been
guaranteed two missions. Awardees will be paid by the mission.77
Commercial Lunar Payload Services. CLPS contracts are indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity
contracts with a cumulative maximum contract value of $2.6 billion through 2028. They are end-to-end
delivery missions to the lunar surface. Included in Table 4 are three high-value CLPS missions: delivery
of NASA’s VIPER by Astrobotic, delivery of the Polar Resources Ice Mining Experiment-1 by Intuitive
Machines, and a science and technology payload mission by Masten Space Systems. The total contract
value of these three missions is $358 million, 14 percent of the $2.6 billion available.
Table 4: Summary of Major Artemis Contracts by System (as of August 2021)
Performance
Period
Contract
Value
Obligated
Amount
Contractor Contract Deliverables Contract Typea
Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle
Design, develop, test, and
evaluate the Orion
spacecraft; test laboratory
program; software
verification; and sustain
engineering and operations
support
Cost-plus-award-fee,
cost-plus-incentive-fee,
and IDIQ
Lockheed
Martin
Orion
Development
9/6/06-
3/31/23 $13.8Bb $13.6B
Orion
Production
and
Operations
Contract
Production of 6 additional
Orion capsules in support of
Artemis III and future
missions
Lockheed
Martin
6/5/19-
9/30/30
Sole source; IDIQ, cost-
plus-incentive-fee $2.7B $623.3M
Space Launch Systemc
Design, build, test, and
evaluate 2 Core Stages,
1 Exploration Upper Stage,
and test articles
Sole source; cost-plus-
award-fee, cost-plus-
incentive-fee, IDIQ, and
firm-fixed-price
11/1/12-
12/31/25
Boeing Stages $9.2B $7.8B
Produce 2 Core Stages and
procure materials for 8
additional Core Stages and
8 Exploration Upper Stages
Stages
Production
and Evolution
10/16/19-
11/15/21
Sole source; under
negotiation
Boeing $1.9B $294.8M
United
Launch
Alliance;
Boeing
Interim
Cryogenic
Propulsion
Stage
3 Interim Cryogenic
Propulsion Stages,
1 structural test article,
and flight software
Sole source; firm-fixed-
price, cost-plus-award-
fee, and IDIQ
10/1/12-
12/31/24 $954.4M $613.3M
Produce 35 booster
segments and upgrade the
boosters for future flights
by replacing outdated parts
Sole source; cost-plus-
award-fee, incentive-
fee, fixed-fee
Northrop
Grumman
12/16/11-
12/31/23
Boostersd $4.3B $4.0B
77 To learn more about NASA OIG audit work of the Gateway Program contracts, see IG-21-004.
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 58
Appendix D
Contractor Contract Deliverables Performance
Period Contract Typea Contract
Value
Obligated
Amount
Adaptation of 16 Space
Shuttle-era RS-25 engines
and development of new
engine controller units used
for communicating with the
vehicle
Sole source; cost-plus-
award-fee, cost-plus-
incentive-fee, and
IDIQ with fixed-fee
RS-25
Adaptation
12/1/11-
9/30/20
Aerojet $572.7Me $572.7M
Restart production and
certification of 24 new
RS-25 engines
Sole source; cost-plus-
award-fee and cost-
plus-incentive-fee
11/1/15-
9/30/29
Aerojet RS-25 Restart $3.5B $1.7B
Exploration Ground Systems
Cost-plus-award-fee,
end item; provisions
to convert to firm-
fixed-price once
design is 90%
complete
Design and construction of
Mobile Launcher 2 with
delivery by March 2023
Mobile
Launcher 2
7/1/19-
6/14/23
Bechtel $411.1M $407.3M
Human Landing System
Firm-fixed-price,
milestone payments,
and IDIQ
A Landing
System
Design and development of
human landing system
5/13/20-
8/23/21
Blue Origin $479.7M $479.7M
Firm-fixed-price,
milestone payments,
and IDIQ
B Landing
System
Design and development of
human landing system
5/13/20-
8/23/21
Dynetics $239.7M $239.7M
Design, develop, test,
evaluate, and demonstrate
a human landing system
Firm-fixed-price,
milestone payments,
and IDIQ
C Landing
System
5/13/20-
2/28/25
SpaceX $3.0B $439.6M
Gateway
Design, develop, test,
manufacture, and
demonstrate the power and
propulsion element
Power and
Propulsion
Element
5/23/19-
12/31/27
Firm-fixed-price with
IDIQ portion
Maxar $346.0M $315.0M
Sole source; firm-
fixed-price then cost-
plus-incentive-fee
through Preliminary
Design Review; then
firm-fixed-price
Habitation
and Logistics
Outpost
Design, develop, test, and
manufacture the habitation
module
Northrop
Grumman
7/31/19-
6/17/26 $1.3B $377.7M
Delivery of cargo to and
from Gateway to support
crewed missions
Logistics
Services
3/25/20-
3/25/35
Firm-fixed-price and
IDIQ
SpaceX $7.0B $56.4M
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 59
Contractor Contract Deliverables Performance
Period Contract Typea Contract
Value
Obligated
Amount
Commercial Lunar Payload Services
Commercial
Lunar
Payload
Services—
VIPER
Delivery of VIPER to the
lunar surface
6/11/20-
4/30/24
Firm-fixed-price and
IDIQ
Astrobotic $230.8M $83.8M
Commercial
Lunar
Payload
Services—
PRIME-1
Delivery of PRIME-1 to the
lunar surface by December
2022
Intuitive
Machines
10/16/20-
1/31/23
Firm-fixed-price and
IDIQ $47.0M $25.9M
Commercial
Lunar
Payload
Services
Deliver and operate
9 payloads of science and
technology instruments to
the lunar surface in 2022f
Masten
Space
Systems
4/8/20-
1/29/23
Firm-fixed-price and
IDIQ $79.9M $64.7M
Totalg $50.1B $31.8B
Appendix D
Source: NASA OIG presentation of Agency information.
Note: Indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity (IDIQ); billion (B); and million (M). This table is not a comprehensive list of all Artemis-related
contracts.
a Using a cost-plus approach, NASA approves all designs, manages all development and schedules, and owns the vehicle once delivered by the
contractor. While the process gives NASA maximum control over the contractor’s design and final product, the majority of cost, schedule, and
outcome risks are borne by the federal government. An IDIQ contract refers to NASA’s ability to issue an undefined number of task orders for
services up to a specified amount of money. A firm-fixed-price contract provides a set price that does not change even if the contractor’s costs
increase during the performance period.
b The contract value for the Orion Development contract includes approximately $6.4 billion awarded under the Constellation Program which
was canceled in 2010.
c The contract value represents SLS deliverables and excludes money spent on the Constellation Program.
d NASA originally awarded this contract to Alliant Technosystems, which merged in 2015 with Orbital Sciences Corporation to become Orbital
ATK. In 2018, Orbital ATK was purchased by Northrop Grumman.
e This does not include approximately $277 million of funds spent in FY 2012 on the J-2X Engine in support of the SLS Program.
f The science and technology instruments for this CLPS mission are L-CIRiS, LETS, Heimdall, MoonRanger, Neutron Spectrometer System, MSolo,
NIRVSS, LRA, and SAMPLR.
g Amounts are rounded. Total figures may not equal the sum of the rounded amounts
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 60
Appendix E
APPENDIX E: MANAGEMENT’S COMMENTS
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 61
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Mary W. Jackson NASA Headquarters
Washington, DC 20546-0001
November 9, 2021
Reply to Attn ot: Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate
TO: Assistant Inspector General for Audits
FROM: Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems Development Mission
Directorate
SUBJECT: Agency Response to OIG Draft Report, "NASA's Management of Artemis
Missions" (A-20-008-01)
The ational Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) appreciates the opportunity to
review and comment on the Office of Inspector General (OIG) draft report entitled, "NASA's
Management of Artemis Missions" (A-20-008-01), dated October 14, 2021.
NASA recognizes that the integration of Artemis, the focus on the Moon to prepare for Mars,
is of critical importance. The Agency proactively identified that a restructure of the Human
Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate (HEOMD) organization was necessary to
ensure effective management of these strategic efforts. To that end, a new Directorate has
been formed, the Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate (ESDMD), led by
Jim Free, to land the first woman and the first person of color on the surface of the Moon,
and provide leadership nationally and internationally as we take these steps forward into deep
space. Under this new focused structure, the Agency will be positioned to address the
integration and management challenges, to include schedule, cost, and performance,
represented by the OIG's findings and recommendations. ASA looks forward to providing
updates on our progress in implementing the recommendations as we continue to move
forward with the initial Artemis missions as the next step in human space exploration.
In the draft report, the OIG makes seven recommendations addressed to the Associate
Administrator (AA) for ESDMD, one recommendation to the NASA Chief Engineer, and one
recommendation to the NASA Deputy Administrator intended to increase accuracy,
transparency, and safety of human spaceflight:
Specifically, the OIG recommends the following to the NASA AA for ESDMD:
Recommendation 1: Develop a realistic, risk-informed schedule that includes sufficient
margin to better align Agency expectations with the development schedule.
Management's Response: NASA concurs with this recommendation. ASA is
developing an integrated master schedule (IMS) for the Artemis missions that will
Appendix E
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 62
include development and production schedule details from each program included in the
mission that will be sourced from contractor schedules and data. Schedule Risk
Assessments (SRAs) will be performed against the mission schedules to identify margin
and risk-informed dates for Artemis missions. The results of the schedule assessments
and program updates will be periodically codified in official planning updates to the
Artemis mission dates and program baselines. The evidence of the implementation of
this recommendation will be shown with the initial baselined Artemis mission planning
dates as well as the Artemis mission IMS, including contractor-informed schedules from
the programs and projects.
Estimated Completion Date: September 2022
Recommendation 2: Expand upon the existing draft Artemis IMS to include Artemis
programs outside AES and ESD to properly align dependencies across directorates.
Management's Response: NASA partially concurs with this recommendation. NASA
does concur that ESDMD/Advanced Exploration Systems (AES) will work with and
include programs, projects, and other efforts across Mission Directorates in the Artemis
mission IMS that have interdependencies with or constraints to defined Artemis mission
content. NASA non-concurs with including all Artemis-related efforts that do not have
an interdependency with a defined mission in an effort to preserve a logically linked and
critical-path-driven master schedule that allows for analysis and clear distinction of
content related to Artemis mission integration.
Estimated Completion Date: September 2022
Recommendation 3: Develop an Artemis-wide cost estimate, in accordance with best
practices, that is updated on an annual basis.
Management's Response: Non-concur. NASA is already following best practices and
Agency policy in providing cost estimates and commitments for Agency-approved
programs and projects. These cost estimates and commitments have a defined set of
content over a specific period which is a best practice and meets the standards required
for cost estimating. This policy also aligns with estimates and commitments at a similar
level to which funding is provided from Congress, which increases transparency. NASA
does provide annually the President's Budget Request that includes the budget
requirements for Artemis content with a five-year forward projection. Agency-approved
programs and projects also establish cost estimates at their defined life cycles marked by
Agency Key Decision Points (KDPs) and provide baseline commitments to their
development costs and operations costs with already established reporting requirements.
As Artemis is the campaign of the Agency's efforts towards lunar exploration, and not an
Agency-defined program with a specific set of content or period of time, a cost estimate
for Artemis would not be in accordance with best practices or provide additional
transparency into specific development, production, and operation costs for programs and
projects.
Estimated Completion Date: NIA
2
Appendix E
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 63
Recommendation 4: Maintain an accounting of per-mission costs to increase
transparency and establish a benchmark against which NASA can assess the outcome of
initiatives to increase the affordability ofESD systems.
Management's Response: Non-concur. NASA remains committed to transparency in
its cost reporting practices that accommodate the unique nature of space exploration
development projects and mission planning. Consistent with previous responses, NASA
continues to maintain that it does not account, track, or report costs on a per-mission
basis, precisely because doing so would reduce contractual transparency to key
stakeholders.
NASA contracts are typically structured to align with the successful development and
production of hardware that meets a specified series of requirements. Multi-mission
programs are required to make decisions in the short term that may have longstanding
implications for future missions, as ongoing development is required to enable necessary
future capabilities. By benchmarking each contract against the development of a specific
capability(ies ), NASA programs are able to practically and efficiently track success
metrics ( e.g., Earned Value Management, award fee bases, etc.) regardless of changes to
the mission manifest, requirements, launch availabilities, etc. Breaking out costs to align
by mission may lead to inefficiencies in the tracking of these pivotal metrics and may
disincentivize the flexibility needed for contractors to continue innovating through
changes in budgeting and appropriations. As such, NASA categorically maintains that
current accounting and reporting practices provide stakeholders the most transparency
into forward mission planning and looks forward to continued engagement with the OIG
to ensure these existing practices are carefully executed and reviewed.
Estimated Completion Date: N/A
Recommendation 5: Definitize outstanding Artemis-related contracts within 180 days
in accordance with NASA FAR Supplement 1843.7005(a), Definitization (2018).
Management's Response: NASA concurs with the intent of this recommendation. The
Center procurement offices are actively negotiating with the contractors to definitize the
undefinitized contract actions (UCAs) and Letter Contracts. In order to reduce future
reliance on UCAs and Letter Contracts, ESDMD's Strategic Integration Management
Division (SIMD) and Exploration Systems Development (ESD) Division are undertaking
analysis of past procurement action lead times to form recommendations for when to
initiate pre-award activities ahead of schedule requirements. ES DMD plans to apply any
lessons learned from ESD's analysis across the Mission Directorate.
Contract Procurement Statuses are reported as part of Directorate Program Management
Council (DPMC) briefs on a quarterly basis. At the DPMC, prolonged definitization
schedules will require explanation and resolution plans to be briefed to the Council.
NASA's Office of Procurement (OP) also monitors the number and age of open UCAs
and Letter Contracts in the Agency as part of the Baseline Performance Review. All
UCAs over $100K must be approved by the Head of Contracting Authority. OP and
3
Appendix E
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 64
ESDMD have established a monthly tag up to discuss contract actions, including UCAs.
NASA can only concur with the intent as NASA FAR Supplement 1843.7005(a) states:
"The NASA goal is to definitize UCAs within 180 days from date of issuance." NASA
does concur with working to meet the goal to definitize UCAs within 180 days from date
of issuance and is actively ensuring processes are in place to meet that goal as described.
Estimated Completion Date: April 2022
Recommendation 6: Develop a realistic funding profile and schedule given the
underfunding of HLS in FY 2021, the selection of one HLS award, and the desire to
compete a sustainability contract for future lunar missions.
Management's Response: NASA concurs with this recommendation. The Human
Landing System (HLS) has made significant progress to advance the Program and the
goal of landing on the Moon in response to the provided funding in FY 2021. This
progress has included an adjustment to the funding profile as demonstrated in the FY
2022 President's Budget Request, the selection of an awardee for the HLS for the initial
lunar lander, awards for risk reduction and industry advancement of sustainable human
lunar landers, and an acceleration of the procurement planning for lunar landing services.
The HLS Program is proceeding to the Agency-level Key Decision Point-C (KDP-C) in
2022, which will include probabilistic cost and schedule risk assessments. From this
KDP-C, an Agency Baseline Commitment to the cost and schedule of the initial lunar
lander will be made as reflected in the HLS Program Plan. Evidence of NASA's
implementation of this recommendation will be shown with the HLS KDP-C and Lunar
Exploration Transportation Services (LETS) Request for Proposal (RFP) release.
Estimated Completion Date: August 2022
Recommendation 7: Identify measurable cost reduction targets for its ESD contractors.
Management's Response: NASA concurs with this recommendation. The Exploration
Ground Systems (EGS), Space Launch System (SLS), and Orion progran1s are in the
process of implementing a series of affordability initiatives that align with the ongoing
transition from development to operations. These initiatives will take a multi-pronged
approach at restructuring contracts (e.g., shifting contract vehicles, award fee policies,
etc.), redefining NASA's insight/oversight model, and transitioning workforce as the
programs transition from development to production and operations. The progran1s, in
conjunction with their Centers and a Headquarters (HQ) Affordability Team, have
focused on several key themes:
• hnplementing alternative acquisition approaches. Examples: The Agency has
released a Request for Information on possible new contracting structures
(Exploration Production and Operations Contract) and is increasingly transitioning to
Firm-fixed Price (FFP) structures ( e.g., the SLS Interim Cryogenic Propulsion Stage
hardware, Upper Stage Engines, and follow-on SLS Booster contract are FFP; Orion
is currently transitioning its Cost Plus Incentive Fee contract to FFP; EGS is
exploring oppo11unities for contract consolidation).
4
Appendix E
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 65
• Instituting process improvements. Examples: NASA is creating a new
insight/oversight governance model through the restructuring of program boards and
organizational structures; ESD Safety & Mission Assurance is pursuing risk-based
assessments to assign an appropriate level of oversight to Government Mandatory
Inspection Point (GMIP) requirements.
• Reducing production time cycles and facility footprints. Example: EGS has
established facility reduction/divestment targets with Kennedy Space Center and is
drafting facility cost-sharing plans, to be implemented in FY 2022.
• Reviewing requirements and specifications for streamlining, implementing lessons
learned, and measuring technical perforn1ance against costs. Examples: For the SLS
Boosters team, learning curve improvements reduced non-conformances by 76
percent; similarly, the SLS Core Stage team achieved a 52 percent reduction in
discrepancies per 1,000 labor hours.
• Planning for sustainable workforce transition and utilization as requirements change
and the programs transition from development to operations. Examples: Reductions
have already occurred on several SLS teams (13 percent reduction in labor hours
forecast from Core Stage 1 to Core Stage 2; on the RS-25 engines team, 45 percent
reduction in touch labor cost, 59 percent reduction in suppo11 labor cost, and 28
percent reduction in nozzle and power head costs); EGS and Orion are tracking
attrition and retirement rates expected upon completion of Artemis I and II missions;
HQ workforce transition lead is performing ongoing analysis and planning in
conjunction with the AES and Systems Engineering & Integration Divisions.
Initial work towards these initiatives has already begun. Each program has identified an
affordability lead to work with relevant stakeholders. Additionally, structured board
processes to evaluate/implement cost reduction initiatives have been established. In the
near term, the individuals will work to establish metrics and schedule goals for the
approaches mentioned above.
Estimated Completion Date: December 2022
NASA's Chief Engineer, in coordination with the HLS Program Manager:
Recommendation 8: Validate that the annual synchronization reviews meet the intent
and expectations of the milestone reviews replaced by the tailored acquisition approach.
Management's Response: NASA concurs with this recommendation. The HLS
tailoring approach was reviewed and endorsed by the Office-of-the-Chief-Engineer-
chaired Program and Project Management Board (June 19, 2019) as a recommendation to
the Agency Program Management Council (APMC), then presented to and approved by
the APMC (June 24, 2019). Further details associated with all HLS Reviews, including
KDP-C and the Annual reviews, will be defined in the Review plans and Tenns of
Reference. These products are developed by the HLS Program and reviewed by all
Agency Technical Authorities. Technical Authorities' and, specifically, the HLS
Program Chief Engineer's, involvement will ensure the tailored HLS approach meets the
intent, expectations, and needs of milestone reviews for the HLS Program. NASA will
5
Appendix E
NASA Office of Inspector General IG-22-003 66
demonstrate the implementation of this recommendation with the life cycle review
portion of the Program Plan, which will be updated and approved at KDP-C.
Estimated Completion Date: August 2022
The NASA Deputy Administrator, in coordination with Mission Directorate Associate
Administrators:
Recommendation 9: Codify the remaining governance structure such as the Federated
Boards and Joint Directorate Program Management Council (DPMC).
Management's Response: NASA partially concurs with this recommendation. NASA
concurs with the recommendation to codify the Joint DPMCs. NASA recognizes the
value of multi-Directorate DPMCs and has recently conducted a joint DPMC with
HEOMD (ESDMD/Space Operations Mission Directorate), Space Technology Mission
Directorate, and the Science Mission Directorate for requirements definition, and will
work to document the roles and responsibilities of future Joint DPMCs.
NASA non-concurs with the recommendation to codify the structure of the Federated
Boards. The Federated Board was established to be a strategic coordination forum and
not a decisional governance body and is currently operating in that manner. Agency
governance structure follows Agency policy documentation which establishes decisional
meetings in the form of Control Boards and Councils of which the Federated Board is not
a part. Additionally, the Federated Board is being reevaluated in the context of the new
leadership personnel that have joined the Agency and the reorganization ofHEOMD into
two new Mission Directorates.
Estimated Completion Date: February 2022
We have reviewed the draft report for information that should not be publicly released. As a
result of this review, we have not identified information that should not be publicly released.
Once again, thank you for the opportunity to review and comment on the subject draft report.
If you have any questions or require additional info1mation regarding this response, please
contact Kelly O'Rourke on (202) 358-1635.
James Free Ralph Roe, Jr.
6
Appendix F
APPENDIX F: REPORT DISTRIBUTION
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Administrator
Deputy Administrator
Associate Administrator
Chief of Staff
Associate Administrator for Space Operations Mission Directorate
Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate
Associate Administrator for Science Mission Directorate
Associate Administrator for Space Technology Mission Directorate
Assistant Administrator for Procurement
Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Exploration Systems
Deputy Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems Development
Director, Glenn Research Center
Director, Johnson Space Center
Director, Kennedy Space Center
Director, Marshall Space Flight Center
Gateway Program Manager
Human Landing System Program Manager
Non-NASA Organizations and Individuals
Office of Management and Budget
Deputy Associate Director, Climate, Energy, Environment and Science Division
Government Accountability Office
Director, Contracting and National Security Acquisitions
Congressional Committees and Subcommittees, Chairman and Ranking
Member
Senate Committee on Appropriations
Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
Subcommittee on Aviation and Space
Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
House Committee on Appropriations
Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies
House Committee on Oversight and Reform
Subcommittee on Government Operations
House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics
(Assignment No. A-20-008-01)